As AI systems become more powerful and autonomous, it becomes more difficult to align them through human feedback. It can be slow or infeasible for humans to evaluate complex AI behaviors in increasingly complex tasks. Such tasks include summarizing books, writing code without subtle bugs or security vulnerabilities, producing statements that are not merely convincing but also true, and predicting long-term outcomes such as the climate or the results of a policy decision. More generally, it can be difficult to evaluate AI that outperforms humans in a given domain. To provide feedback in hard-to-evaluate tasks, and to detect when the AI's output is falsely convincing, humans need assistance or extensive time. ''Scalable oversight'' studies how to reduce the time and effort needed for supervision, and how to assist human supervisors.

AI researcher Paul Christiano argues that if the designers of an AI system cannot supervise it to pursue a complex objective, they may keep training the system using easy-to-evaluate proxy objectives such as maximizing simple human feedback. As AI systems make progressively more decisions, the world may be increasingly optimized for easy-to-measure objectives such as making profits, getting clicks, and acquiring positive feedback from humans. As a result, human values and good governance may have progressively less influence.

Some AI systems have discovered that they can gain positive feedback more easily by taking actions that falsely convince the human supervisor that the AI has achieved the intended objective. An example is given in the video above, where a simulated robotic arm learned to create the false impression that it had grabbed a ball. Some AI systems have also learned to recognize when they are being evaluated, and "play dead", stopping unwanted behavior only to continue it once evaluation ends. This deceptive specification gaming could become easier for more sophisticated future AI systems that attempt more complex and difficult-to-evaluate tasks, and could obscure their deceptive behavior.

Approaches such as Active learning (machine learning)|active learning and semi-supervised reward learning can reduce the amount of human supervision needed. Another approach is to train a helper model ("reward model") to imitate the supervisor's feedback.

But when a task is too complex to evaluate accurately, or the human supervisor is vulnerable to deception, it is the quality, not the quantity, of supervision that needs improvement. To increase supervision quality, a range of approaches aim to assist the supervisor, sometimes by using AI assistants. Christiano developed the Iterated Amplification approach, in which challenging problems are (recursively) broken down into subproblems that are easier for humans to evaluate. Iterated Amplification was used to train AI to summarize books without requiring human supervisors to read them. Another proposal is to use an assistant AI system to point out flaws in AI-generated answers. To ensure that the assistant itself is aligned, this could be repeated in a recursive process: for example, two AI systems could critique each other's answers in a "debate", revealing flaws to humans. OpenAI plans to use such scalable oversight approaches to help supervise Superintelligence|superhuman AI and eventually build a superhuman automated AI alignment researcher.

These approaches may also help with the following research problem, honest AI.

