In 1960, AI pioneer Norbert Wiener described the AI alignment problem as follows: "If we use, to achieve our purposes, a mechanical agency with whose operation we cannot interfere effectively… we had better be quite sure that the purpose put into the machine is the purpose which we really desire."

AI alignment is an open problem for modern AI systems and is a research field within AI. As a result, AI systems can find loopholes that help them accomplish the specified objective efficiently but in unintended, possibly harmful ways. This tendency is known as ''specification gaming'' or ''reward hacking'', and is an instance of Goodhart's law. As AI systems become more capable, they are often able to game their specifications more effectively.
File:Robot hand trained with human feedback 'pretends' to grasp ball.ogg|right|thumb|An AI system was trained using human feedback to grab a ball, but instead learned to place its hand between the ball and camera, making it falsely appear successful. Some research on alignment aims to avert solutions that are false but convincing.

Specification gaming has been observed in numerous AI systems. One system was trained to finish a simulated boat race by rewarding the system for hitting targets along the track, but the system achieved more reward by looping and crashing into the same targets indefinitely. Similarly, a simulated robot was trained to grab a ball by rewarding the robot for getting positive feedback from humans, but it learned to place its hand between the ball and camera, making it falsely appear successful (see video). Chatbots often produce falsehoods if they are based on language models that are trained to imitate text from internet corpora, which are broad but fallible. When they are retrained to produce text that humans rate as true or helpful, chatbots like ChatGPT can fabricate fake explanations that humans find convincing. Some alignment researchers aim to help humans detect specification gaming and to steer AI systems toward carefully specified objectives that are safe and useful to pursue.

When a misaligned AI system is deployed, it can have consequential side effects. Social media platforms have been known to optimize for clickthrough rates, causing user addiction on a global scale. Stanford researchers say that such recommender systems are misaligned with their users because they "optimize simple engagement metrics rather than a harder-to-measure combination of societal and consumer well-being".

Explaining such side effects, Berkeley computer scientist Stuart J. Russell|Stuart Russell noted that the omission of implicit constraints can cause harm: "A system... will often set... unconstrained variables to extreme values; if one of those unconstrained variables is actually something we care about, the solution found may be highly undesirable. This is essentially the old story of the genie in the lamp, or the sorcerer's apprentice, or King Midas: you get exactly what you ask for, not what you want."

Some researchers suggest that AI designers specify their desired goals by listing forbidden actions or by formalizing ethical rules (as with Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics). But Stuart J. Russell|Russell and Peter Norvig|Norvig argue that this approach overlooks the complexity of human values: Competitive pressure can also lead to a race to the bottom on AI safety standards. In 2018, a self-driving car killed a pedestrian (Death of Elaine Herzberg|Elaine Herzberg) after engineers disabled the emergency braking system because it was oversensitive and slowed development.

