Many of the largest global threats (nuclear war, climate change, etc.) have been framed as cooperation challenges. As in the well-known prisoner's dilemma scenario, some dynamics may lead to poor results for all players, even when they are optimally acting in their self-interest. For example, no single actor has strong incentives to address climate change even though the consequences may be significant if no one intervenes. In this scenario, countries or companies race to build more capable AI systems and neglect safety, leading to a catastrophic accident that harms everyone involved. Concerns about scenarios like these have inspired both political and technical efforts to facilitate cooperation between humans, and potentially also between AI systems. Most AI research focuses on designing individual agents to serve isolated functions (often in ‘single-player’ games). Scholars have suggested that as AI systems become more autonomous, it may become essential to study and shape the way they interact. have highlighted the environmental and financial costs associated with training these models, emphasizing that the energy consumption and carbon footprint of training procedures like those for Transformer models can be substantial. Moreover, these models often rely on massive, uncurated Internet-based datasets, which can encode hegemonic and biased viewpoints, further marginalizing underrepresented groups. The large-scale training data, while vast, does not guarantee diversity and often reflects the worldviews of privileged demographics, leading to models that perpetuate existing biases and stereotypes. This situation is exacerbated by the tendency of these models to produce seemingly coherent and fluent text, which can mislead users into attributing meaning and intent where none exists, a phenomenon described as 'stochastic parrots.' These models, therefore, pose risks of amplifying societal biases, spreading misinformation, and being used for malicious purposes, such as generating extremist propaganda or deepfakes. To address these challenges, researchers advocate for more careful planning in dataset creation and system development, emphasizing the need for research projects that contribute positively towards an equitable technological ecosystem.

