In 2016, the professional networking site LinkedIn was discovered to recommend male variations of women's names in response to search queries. The site did not make similar recommendations in searches for male names. For example, "Andrea" would bring up a prompt asking if users meant "Andrew", but queries for "Andrew" did not ask if users meant to find "Andrea". The company said this was the result of an analysis of users' interactions with the site.

In 2012, the department store franchise Target (company)|Target was cited for gathering data points to infer when women customers were pregnant, even if they had not announced it, and then sharing that information with marketing partners. Because the data had been predicted, rather than directly observed or reported, the company had no legal obligation to protect the privacy of those customers. In 2017, Google adjusted these results along with others that surfaced hate groups, racist views, child abuse and pornography, and other upsetting and offensive content. Other examples include the display of higher-paying jobs to male applicants on job search websites. Researchers have also identified that machine translation exhibits a strong tendency towards male defaults. In particular, this is observed in fields linked to unbalanced gender distribution, including Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics|STEM occupations. In fact, current machine translation systems fail to reproduce the real world distribution of female workers.

In 2015, Amazon.com turned off an AI system it developed to screen job applications when they realized it was biased against women. The recruitment tool excluded applicants who attended all-women's colleges and resumes that included the word "women's". A similar problem emerged with music streaming services—In 2019, it was discovered that the recommender system algorithm used by Spotify was biased against women artists. Spotify's song recommendations suggested more male artists over women artists.

