further|Fairness (machine learning)}}

There have been several attempts to create methods and tools that can detect and observe biases within an algorithm. These emergent fields focus on tools which are typically applied to the (training) data used by the program rather than the algorithm's internal processes. These methods may also analyze a program's output and its usefulness and therefore may involve the analysis of its confusion matrix (or table of confusion). Explainable AI to detect algorithm Bias is a suggested way to detect the existence of bias in an algorithm or learning model. Using machine learning to detect bias is called, "conducting an AI audit", where the "auditor" is an algorithm that goes through the AI model and the training data to identify biases.
Ensuring that an AI tool such as a classifier is free from bias is more difficult than just removing the sensitive information
from its input signals, because this is typically implicit in other signals. For example, the hobbies, sports and schools attended
by a job candidate might reveal their gender to the software, even when this is removed from the analysis. Solutions to this
problem involve ensuring that the intelligent agent does not have any information that could be used to reconstruct the protected
and sensitive information about the subject, as first demonstrated in  where a deep learning network was simultaneously trained to learn a task while at the same time being completely agnostic about the protected feature. A simpler method was proposed in the context of word embeddings, and involves removing information that is correlated with the protected characteristic.

Currently, a new IEEE Standards Association|IEEE standard is being drafted that aims to specify methodologies which help creators of algorithms eliminate issues of bias and articulate transparency (i.e. to authorities or end users) about the function and possible effects of their algorithms. The project was approved February 2017 and is sponsored by the [https://www.computer.org/web/standards/s2esc Software & Systems Engineering Standards Committee], a committee chartered by the IEEE Computer Society. A draft of the standard is expected to be submitted for balloting in June 2019.

