File:Enabling eCommerce- Small Enterprises, Global Players (39008130265) (cropped).jpg|thumb|[[Jack Ma, founder and the former executive chairman of the Alibaba Group|alt=]]
Alibaba's main co-founder Jack Ma served as the executive chairman of the Alibaba Group from its founding until 10 September 2019. Daniel Zhang succeeded Ma and has also served as Alibaba's CEO since 2015. J. Michael Evans has served as Alibaba's president since 2015. Jack Ma had stepped down as CEO in 2013 and chose  Jonathan Lu as his successor. The Alibaba Group under Lu was performing well, though there were rumors that Ma was growing distrustful in Lu's ability to lead the company. Daniel Zhang, who served as Chief operating officer|COO of Alibaba under Lu, succeeded Lu as CEO in 2015. On 10 September 2018, Ma chose Zhang to succeed him as executive chairman of the Alibaba Group after his stepping down announcement, and this would go into effect in 1 year on 10 September 2019.

Since 2012, the Chinese Communist Party has had a Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary|Party Committee in place in the company and has over 2,000 party members as Alibaba employees. In September 2019, the municipal government of Hangzhou announced that it was assigning government officials to work with tech companies and manufacturers in Zhejiang province, including Alibaba, in what city officials stated was an effort “to facilitate communication and expedite projects”.

After the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Alibaba faced criticism for continuing to do business in Russia. In August 2023, Ukraine's National Agency on Corruption Prevention designated the company an 'international sponsor of war' owing to it providing a platform for the sale of copper goods sourced from the occupied territories of Ukraine.

Alibaba Group Holding Ltd has announced Joseph Tsai as the new chairman and Eddie Wu as the CEO. This move comes as the company seeks to revive growth in the post-crackdown era, with Tsai providing strategic direction and Wu driving operational excellence.

