In December 2020, ''The New York Times'' reported that Alibaba had developed and marketed facial recognition and surveillance software configured to detect Uyghurs|Uyghur faces and those of other ethnic minorities in China. Alibaba responded that they "do not and will not permit our technology to be used to target or identify specific ethnic groups" and that it was "dismayed to learn" that its Alibaba Cloud subsidiary had developed this feature, defending that the technology was developed "in a testing environment" and that it "was not deployed by any customer." However, IPVM reported in December 2020 that Alibaba refused to provide any proof the Uyghur recognition feature was just a "test" or "trial" and that Alibaba's own website showed Uyghur recognition as a live feature. It also provides the online digital distribution service 9Apps, which hosts downloadable content and applications.

In March 2014, Alibaba agreed to acquire a controlling stake in Alibaba Pictures|ChinaVision Media Group for $804&nbsp;million. The two firms announced they would establish a strategic committee for potential future opportunities in online entertainment and other media areas. The company was renamed Alibaba Pictures Group (SEHK: 1060). In March 2015, Alibaba Group launched AliMusic as its music division. Xiami Music and Tiantian Music are two of music steaming APP owned by AliMusic. AliMusic named Gao Xiaosong as the chairman and Song Ke as chief executive officer in July 2015. In 2017, Tencent Music has expected $10bn IPO by signing a rights deal with Alibaba, strengthening its position within the important Chinese market. Under the terms of the deal Alibaba will gain the right to stream music from international labels such as Sony Music, Universal Music Group and YG Entertainment, which already have exclusive deals with Tencent, in return for offering to its catalogue from Rock Records, HIM International Music and so on. In April 2014, Alibaba and Yunfeng Capital, a private equity company controlled by Alibaba's founder, Jack Ma, agreed to acquire a combined 18.5 percent stake in Youku Tudou, which broadcasts a series of popular television programs and other videos over the Internet.

Since restructuring in March 2023, the Digital Media and Entertainment Group has been led by Fan Luyuan as CEO.

