James Vincent, a reporter from The Verge, comments that "It prods and pokes viewers with unsubtle emotional cues, like a reality TV show would. "Now, you should be nervous; now you should feel relieved". The AlphaGo footage slowly captures the moment when Lee Sedol acknowledges the true power of AlphaGo AI. In the first game, he had more experience than his human-programmed AI, so he thought it would be easy to beat the AI. However, the early game dynamics were not what he expected. After losing the first match, he became more nervous and lost confidence. Afterward, he reacted to attacks by saying that he just wanted to win the match, unintentionally displaying his anger, and acting in an unusual way. Also, he spends 12 minutes on one move, while AlphaGo only takes a minute and a half to respond. AlphaGo weighs each alternative equally and consistently. No reaction to Lee's fight. Instead, the game continues as if he was not there.

James also said that "suffice to say that humanity does land at least one blow on the machines, through Lee's so-called "divine move". "More likely, the forces of automation we'll face will be impersonal and incomprehensible. They'll come in the form of star ratings we can't object to, and algorithms we can't fully understand. Dealing with the problems of AI will take a perspective that looks beyond individual battles. AlphaGo is worth seeing because it raises these questions" (Vincent, 2017) 

Murray Shanahan, a professor of cognitive robotics at Imperial College London, critics that "Go is an extraordinary game but it represents what we can do with AI in all kinds of other spheres," says Murray Shanahan, professor of cognitive robotics at Imperial College London and senior research scientist at DeepMind, says. "In just the same way there are all kinds of realms of possibility within Go that have not been discovered, we could never have imagined the potential for discovering drugs and other materials."  (Frederic and Mary Ann Brussat, n.d.)

