Go is a popular game in China, Japan and Korea, and the 2016 matches were watched by perhaps a hundred million people worldwide. Many top Go players characterized AlphaGo's unorthodox plays as seemingly-questionable moves that initially befuddled onlookers, but made sense in hindsight: where a computer had beaten a Go professional for the first time ever without the advantage of a handicap. The Korea Baduk Association, the organization that oversees Go professionals in South Korea, awarded AlphaGo an honorary 9-dan title for exhibiting creative skills and pushing forward the game's progress.

China's Ke Jie, an 18-year-old generally recognized as the world's best Go player at the time, initially claimed that he would be able to beat AlphaGo, but declined to play against it for fear that it would "copy my style". but regaining confidence after AlphaGo displayed flaws in the fourth match.

Toby Manning, the referee of AlphaGo's match against Fan Hui, and Hajin Lee, secretary general of the International Go Federation, both reason that in the future, Go players will get help from computers to learn what they have done wrong in games and improve their skills.

After game two, Lee said he felt "speechless": "From the very beginning of the match, I could never manage an upper hand for one single move. It was AlphaGo's total victory." Lee apologized for his losses, stating after game three that "I misjudged the capabilities of AlphaGo and felt powerless." <!-- Metacritic has 4 reviews, no critic score listed. -->

Michael Rechtshaffen of the Los Angeles Times gave the documentary a positive review and said: "It helps matters when you have a group of engaging human subjects like soft-spoken Sedol, who's as intensively contemplative as the game itself, contrasted by the spirited, personable Fan Hui, the Paris-based European champ who accepts an offer to serve as an advisor for the DeepMind team after suffering a demoralizing AI trouncing". He also mentioned that with the passion of Hauschka's Volker Bertelmann, the film's producer, this documentary shows many unexpected sequences, including strategic and philosophical components. (Rechtshaffen, 2017
John Defore of The Hollywood Reporter, wrote this documentary is "an involving sports-rivalry doc with an AI twist." "In the end, observers wonder if AlphaGo's odd variety of intuition might not kill Go as an intellectual pursuit but shift its course, forcing the game's scholars to consider it from new angles. So maybe it isn't time to welcome our computer overlords, and won't be for a while - maybe they'll teach us to be better thinkers before turning us into their slaves." 

Greg Kohs, the director of the film, said "The complexity of the game of Go, combined with the technical depth of an emerging technology like artificial intelligence seemed like it might create an insurmountable barrier for a film like this. The fact that I was so innocently unaware of Go and AlphaGo actually proved to be beneficial. It allowed me to approach the action and interviews with pure curiosity, the kind that helps make any subject matter emotionally accessible." Kohs also said that "Unlike the film's human characters – who turn their curious quest for knowledge into an epic spectacle with great existential implications, who dare to risk their reputation and pride to contest that curiosity – AI might not yet possess the ability to empathize. But it can teach us profound things about our humanness – the way we play board games, the way we think and feel and grow. It's a deep, vast premise, but my hope is, by sharing it, we can discover something within ourselves we never saw before".

