In 1998, Philips' management board commissioned a series of presentations and internal workshops organized by Eli Zelkha and Brian Epstein of Palo Alto Ventures. They investigated future scenarios and how consumer devices might advance over the next quarter-century. Zelkha and Epstein described the high-volume consumer electronics industry of the 1990s as "fragmented with features"; they envisioned that by 2020, an industry where user-friendly devices would support ubiquitous information, communication, and entertainment. This outcome coined the term "ambient intelligence".

While developing the ambient intelligence concept, Palo Alto Ventures created the keynote address for Roel Pieper of Philips for the Digital Living Room Conference in 1998. The group included Eli Zelkha, Brian Epstein, Simon Birrell, Doug Randall, and Clark Dodsworth. In 2000, there were plans to construct a feasibility and usability facility dedicated to ambient intelligence; these led to the opening of HomeLab on 24 April 2002. In 2005, Philips joined the Oxygen Alliance, an international consortium of industrial partners within the context of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology|MIT Oxygen project, aimed at developing technology for the computer of the 21st century.

Along with developing the vision at Philips, several parallel initiatives started to explore ambient intelligence in more detail. Following the advice of the Information Society and Technology Advisory Group (ISTAG), the European Commission used the vision for the launch of their sixth framework (FP6) in Information, Society and Technology, with a budget of 3.7 billion euros.

During the first decade of the 21st century, several significant initiatives have been started. The Fraunhofer Society started several activities, including multimedia, Microsystem|micro-system design, and augmented spaces. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology started an ambient intelligence research group at their Media Lab. Several more research projects started in a variety of countries such as the US, Canada, Spain, France, and the Netherlands. Since 2004, the European Symposium on Ambient Intelligence (EUSAI) and many other conferences have been held that address special topics in ambient intelligence.

