Please add descriptions of individual androids to that list, not here, so as to avoid duplication. Thanks! -->

Androids are a staple of science fiction. Isaac Asimov pioneered the fictionalization of the science of robotics and artificial intelligence, notably in his 1950s series ''I, Robot''. One thing common to most fictional androids is that the real-life technological challenges associated with creating thoroughly human-like robots—such as the creation of artificial general intelligence|strong artificial intelligence—are assumed to have been solved. Fictional androids are often depicted as mentally and physically equal or superior to humans—moving, thinking and speaking as fluidly as them. Perhaps the clearest example of this is John Brunner (novelist)|John Brunner's 1968 novel ''Into the Slave Nebula'', where the blue-skinned android slaves are explicitly shown to be fully human. More recently, the androids Bishop (Aliens)|Bishop and Annalee Call in the films ''Aliens (film)|Aliens'' and ''Alien Resurrection'' are used as vehicles for exploring how humans deal with the presence of an "Other (philosophy)|Other". The 2018 video game ''Detroit: Become Human'' also explores how androids are treated as second class citizens in a near future society.

Female androids, or "gynoids", are often seen in science fiction, and can be viewed as a continuation of the long tradition of men attempting to create the stereotypical "perfect woman". Examples include the Greek mythology|Greek myth of ''Pygmalion (mythology)|Pygmalion'' and Maschinenmensch|the female robot Maria in Fritz Lang's ''Metropolis (1927 film)|Metropolis''. Some gynoids, like Pris in ''Blade Runner'', are designed as sex-objects, with the intent of "pleasing men's violent sexual desires", or as submissive, servile companions, such as in ''The Stepford Wives''. Fiction about gynoids has therefore been described as reinforcing "essentialist ideas of femininity", although others have suggested that the treatment of androids is a way of exploring racism and misogyny in society.

The 2015 Japanese film ''Sayonara (2015 film)|Sayonara'', starring Geminoid F, was promoted as "the first movie to feature an android performing opposite a human actor".

