Since the 1960s, anthropomorphism has also been represented in various animated television shows such as ''Biker Mice From Mars'' (1993–1996) and ''SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron'' (1993–1995).  ''Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987 TV series)|Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles'', first aired in 1987, features four pizza-loving anthropomorphic turtles with a great knowledge of ninjutsu, led by their anthropomorphic rat sensei, Master Splinter. Nickelodeon's longest running animated TV series ''SpongeBob SquarePants'' (1999–present), revolves around SpongeBob SquarePants (character)|SpongeBob, a yellow Sponge|sea sponge, living in the underwater town of Bikini Bottom with his anthropomorphic marine life friends. Cartoon Network's animated series ''The Amazing World of Gumball'' (2011–2019) are about anthropomorphic animals and inanimate objects. All of the characters in Hasbro Studios' TV series ''My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic'' (2010–2019) are anthropomorphic fantasy creatures, with most of them being Pony|ponies living in the pony-inhabited land of Equestria. The Netflix original series Centaurworld focuses on a warhorse who gets transported to a Dr. Seuss-like world full of centaurs who possess the bottom half of any animal, as opposed to the traditional horse.

In the American animated TV series ''Family Guy'', one of the show's main characters, Brian Griffin|Brian, is a dog. Brian shows many human characteristics – he walks upright, talks, smokes, and drinks Martinis – but also acts like a normal dog in other ways; for example, he cannot resist chasing a ball and barks at the mailman, believing him to be a threat. In a similar case, ''BoJack Horseman'', an American Netflix adult animated black comedy series, takes place in an alternative history|alternate world where humans and anthropomorphic animals live side by side, and centers around the life of BoJack Horseman (character)|BoJack Horseman; a humanoid horse who was a one hit wonder on a popular 1990s sitcom ''Horsin' Around'', living off the show's residual (entertainment industry)|residuals in present time. Multiple main characters of the series are other animals who possess Human body|human body form and other Human behavior|human-like traits and identity as well; Mr. Peanutbutter, a humanoid dog lives a mostly human lifehe speaks American English, Gait (human)#Walk|walks upright, owns a house, drives a car, is in a Human sexuality|romantic relationship with a human woman (in this series, as animals and humans are speciesism|seen as equal, relationships like this are not seen as bestiality but seen as regular human sexuality), Diane Nguyen|Diane, and has a successful career in televisionhowever also exhibits Dog behavior|dog traitshe sleeps in a human-size dog bed, gets arrested for having a drag race with the mailman and is once forced to wear a Elizabethan collar|dog cone after he gets stitches in his arm.

The PBS Kids animated series ''Let's Go Luna!'' centers on an anthropomorphic female Moon who speaks, sings, and dances. She comes down out of the sky to serve as a tutor of international culture to the three main characters: a boy frog and wombat and a girl butterfly, who are supposed to be preschool children traveling a world populated by anthropomorphic animals with a circus run by their parents.

The French-Belgian animated series ''Mush-Mush & the Mushables'' takes place in a world inhabited by Mushables, which are anthropomrphic fungi, along with other critters such as beetles, snails, and frogs.

