File:Down the Rabbit Hole.png|thumb|upright|[[John Tenniel|John Tenniel's depiction of White Rabbit|this anthropomorphic rabbit was featured in the first chapter of Lewis Carroll's ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland''.]]
File:Butterfly meeting.jpg|thumb|upright=1.4|From ''The Emperor's Rout'' (1831)
Building on the popularity of fables and fairy tales, Children's literature|''children's'' literature began to emerge in the nineteenth century with works such as ''Alice's Adventures in Wonderland'' (1865) by Lewis Carroll, ''The Adventures of Pinocchio'' (1883) by Carlo Collodi and ''The Jungle Book'' (1894) by Rudyard Kipling, all employing anthropomorphic elements. This continued in the twentieth century with many of the most popular titles having anthropomorphic characters, examples being ''The Tale of Peter Rabbit'' (1901) and later books by Beatrix Potter; ''The Wind in the Willows'' by Kenneth Grahame (1908); ''Winnie-the-Pooh (book)|Winnie-the-Pooh'' (1926) and ''The House at Pooh Corner'' (1928) by A. A. Milne; and ''The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe'' (1950) and the subsequent books in ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' series by C. S. Lewis.

In many of these stories the animals can be seen as representing facets of human personality and character. As John Rowe Townsend remarks, discussing ''The Jungle Book'' in which the boy Mowgli must rely on his new friends the bear Baloo and the black panther Bagheera, "The world of the jungle is in fact both itself and our world as well". sometimes have anthropomorphic animals as characters. The Best selling books|best-selling examples of the genre are ''The Hobbit'' (1937) and ''The Lord of the Rings'' (1954–1955), both by J. R. R. Tolkien, books peopled with talking creatures such as ravens, spiders, and the dragon Smaug and a multitude of anthropomorphic goblins and elves. John D. Rateliff calls this the "Doctor Dolittle Theme" in his book ''The History of the Hobbit'' and Tolkien saw this anthropomorphism as closely linked to the emergence of human language and myth: "...The first men to talk of 'trees and stars' saw things very differently. To them, the world was alive with mythological beings... To them the whole of creation was 'myth-woven and elf-patterned'."

Richard Adams developed a distinctive take on anthropomorphic writing in the 1970s: his debut novel, ''Watership Down'' (1972), featured rabbits that could talkwith their own distinctive language (Lapine language|Lapine) and mythologyand included a police state|police-state warren, Efrafa. Despite this, Adams attempted to ensure his characters' behavior mirrored that of wild rabbits, engaging in fighting, copulating and defecating, drawing on Ronald Lockley's study ''The Private Life of the Rabbit'' as research. Adams returned to anthropomorphic storytelling in his later novels ''The Plague Dogs (novel)'' (1977) and ''Traveller (novel)|Traveller'' (1988).

By the 21st century, the children's picture book market had expanded massively. Perhaps a majority of picture books have some kind of anthropomorphism, with popular examples being ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar'' (1969) by Eric Carle and ''The Gruffalo'' (1999) by Julia Donaldson.

Anthropomorphism in literature and other media led to a sub-culture known as furry fandom, which promotes and creates stories and artwork involving anthropomorphic animals, and the examination and interpretation of humanity through anthropomorphism. This can often be shortened in searches as "anthro", used by some as an alternative term to "furry".

Anthropomorphic characters have also been a staple of the comic book genre. The most prominent one was Neil Gaiman's the ''The Sandman (Vertigo)|Sandman'' which had a huge impact on how characters that are physical embodiments are written in the fantasy genre. Other examples also include the mature ''Hellblazer'' (personified political and moral ideas), ''Fables (comics)|Fables'' and its spin-off series ''Jack of Fables'', which was unique for having anthropomorphic representation of literary techniques and genres. Various Japanese manga and anime have used anthropomorphism as the basis of their story. Examples include ''Squid Girl'' (anthropomorphized squid), ''Hetalia: Axis Powers'' (personified countries), ''Upotte!!'' (personified guns), ''Arpeggio of Blue Steel'' and ''Kancolle'' (personified ships).

