Further|Digital pathology}}
File:Ki67 calculation by QuPath in a pure seminoma.png|thumb|[[Ki67 stain calculation by the open-source software QuPath in a pure seminoma, which gives a measure of the proliferation rate of the tumor. The colors represent the intensity of expression: blue-no expression, yellow-low, orange-moderate, and red-high expression.]]
For many diseases, Pathology|pathological analysis of cells and tissues is considered to be the gold standard of disease diagnosis. Methods of digital pathology allows microscopy slides to be scanned and digitally analyzed. AI-assisted pathology tools have been developed to assist with the diagnosis of a number of diseases, including breast cancer, hepatitis B, Stomach cancer|gastric cancer, and colorectal cancer. AI has also been used to predict genetic mutations and prognosticate disease outcomes. Several deep learning and artificial neural network models have shown accuracy similar to that of human pathologists, Additionally, implementation of digital pathology is predicted to save over $12 million for a university center over the course of five years, though savings attributed to AI specifically have not yet been widely researched. The use of Augmented reality|augmented and virtual reality could prove to be a stepping stone to wider implementation of AI-assisted pathology, as they can highlight areas of concern on a pathology sample and present them in real-time to a pathologist for more efficient review. One of the major current barriers to widespread implementation of AI-assisted pathology tools is the lack of prospective, randomized, multi-center controlled Clinical trial|trials in determining the true clinical utility of AI for pathologists and patients, highlighting a current area of need in AI and healthcare research. AI in primary care has been used for supporting decision making, predictive modelling, and business analytics. There are only a few examples of AI decision support systems that were prospectively assessed on clinical efficacy when used in practice by physicians. But there are cases where the use of these systems yielded a positive effect on treatment choice by physicians.

