Artificial intelligence research and development did not start until the late 1970s after Chinese economic reform|economic reforms when Deng Xiaoping announced his famous phrase, "science and technology are primary productive forces" (科技是第一生产力). Deng's speech demonstrated China's commitment to technological innovation. While there was a lack of AI-related research between the 1950s and 1960s, some scholars believe this is due to the influence of cybernetics from the Soviet Union despite the Sino-Soviet split during the late 1950s and early 1960s. In the 1980s, a group of Chinese scientists launched AI research led by Qian Xuesen and Wu Wenjun. Even now, CAAI is still the only national academic association in China that specializes in technology and intelligence science. 

Since the 2000s, China has further expanded its Research and development|R&D funds for AI and the number of government-sponsored research projects has dramatically increased. In 2001, Xinhua News Agency released a report titled "China's artificial intelligence research has entered a new era," announcing that China's AI research had transitioned from following foreign research to independent research after the 2001 National Conference of the Chinese Association for Artificial Intelligence. The advancements presented during the conference have demonstrated China's ability to innovate in the field of AI and marked a new era of Chinese AI research.

In 2006, China announced a policy priority for the development of artificial intelligence, which was included in the National Medium and Long Term Plan for the Development of Science and Technology (2006–2020), released by the State Council of the People's Republic of China|State Council.

In 2011, the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) established a branch in Beijing, China. At same year, the Wu Wenjun Artificial Intelligence Science and Technology Award was founded in honor of Chinese mathematician Wu Wenjun, and it became the highest award for Chinese achievements in the field of Artificial Intelligence. The first award ceremony was held on May 14, 2012. In 2013, the International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) was held in Beijing, marking the first time the conference was held in China. This event coincided with the Chinese government's announcement of the "Chinese Intelligence Year," a significant milestone in China's development of artificial intelligence. During the Two Sessions 2017,"artificial intelligence plus" was proposed to be elevated to a strategic level. The same year witnessed the emergence of multiple application-level usages in the medical field according to reports. Furthermore, the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) established their AI processor chip research lab in Nanjing, and introduced their first AI specialization chip 'Cambrian'.

In 2018, the State Council budgeted $2.1 billion for an AI industrial park in Mentougou District|Mentougou district. In order to achieve this the State Council stated the need for massive talent acquisition, theoretical and practical developments, as well as public and private investments. Some researchers and scholars argued China's commitment to global AI leadership and technological competition was driven by its previous underperformance in innovation which was seen as a part of the "century of humiliation" since the Qing dynasty by the central government. There are historically embedded causes of China's anxiety towards securing an international technological dominance – China missed both industrial revolutions, the Industrial Revolution|one starting in Britain in the mid-18th century, and the Second Industrial Revolution|one that originated in America in the late-19th century. Therefore, China's government desires to take advantage of the technological revolution in today's world led by digital technology including AI to resume China's "rightful" place and to pursue the national rejuvenation proposed by Xi. Some of the stated motivations that the State Council gave for pursuing its AI strategy include the potential of artificial intelligence for industrial transformation, better social governance and maintaining social stability.

In 2019, the application of Artificial Intelligence expanded to various fields such as quantum physics, geography, and medical research. With the emergence of large language models (LLMs), such as GPT, at the beginning of 2020, Chinese researchers began developing their own LLM. One such example is the multimodal large model called 'Zidongtaichu.' Several Chinese companies and academic institutions are actively involved in LLM research, including Baidu's Ernie. In March 2023, Huawei released its trillion parameter LLM 'PanGu-Sigma,' as an example in Chinese LLM development.

