Mitchell describes the fears her mentor, cognitive scientist and AI pioneer Douglas Hofstadter, has expressed that advances of artificial intelligence could turn human beings into "relics". Mitchell offers examples of AI systems like Watson (computer)|Watson that are trained to master specific tasks, and points out that such computers lack the artificial general intelligence|general intelligence that humans have. Mitchell argues that achieving superintelligence would require that machines acquire commonsense reasoning abilities that are nowhere in sight: "Today's AI is far from general intelligence, and I don’t believe that machine 'superintelligence' is anywhere on the horizon." Mitchell addresses 13 pages to "Trustworthy and Ethical AI". Mitchell states artificial intelligence is vulnerable to errors, to racial bias, and to malicious hacking such as surprisingly easy adversarial machine learning|adversarial attacks: "If there are statistical associations in the training data... the machine will happily learn those instead of what you wanted it to learn." Mitchell also includes lighthearted content, such as documenting the Star Trek (franchise)|Star Trek computer's status as an aspirational lodestar within the AI community. ''Kirkus Reviews'' judged that despite a minority of the book being "too abstruse", most of the book was "surprisingly lucid". In ''Skeptic (US magazine)|Skeptic'', computer programmer Peter Kassan compares the book favorably with "histrionic" works such as ''Life 3.0'', ''You Look Like a Thing and I Love You'', and ''The Age of Spiritual Machines''. Kassan calls the book "the most ''intelligent'' book on the subject" and praises Mitchell for being "measured, cautious, and often skeptical", unlike "most active practitioners in the field".<ref name=skeptic/>

In ''The Christian Science Monitor'', author Barbara Spindel states the "lucid", "clear-eyed" and "fascinating" book does a good job documenting that artificial general intelligence is nowhere near, and believes that "many readers will be reassured to know that we will not soon have to bow down to our AI takeover|computer overlords." Spindel expresses surprise that Mitchell goes on to express her personal passion toward trying to solve the puzzle of commonsense reasoning and presumably enable the development of superintelligent machines: "While computers won't surpass humans anytime soon, not everyone will be convinced that the effort to help them along is a good idea".<ref name=csmonitor/>

