Artificial intelligence is changing the recruiting process by gradually replacing routine tasks performed by human recruiters. AI can reduce human involvement in hiring and reduce the human biases that hinder effective hiring decisions.

AI is changing the way work is done. Artificial intelligence along with other technological advances such as improvements in robotics have placed 47% of jobs at risk of being eliminated in the near future. Some classify the shifts in labor brought about by AI as a 4th industrial revolution, which they call Industrial Revolution 4.0. Other scholars refute this theory claiming that AI has already led to significant job loss for unskilled labor and that it will eliminate middle skill and high skill jobs in the future. This position is based around the idea that AI is not yet a technology of general use and that any potential 4th industrial revolution has not fully occurred. In other words, in most cases, artificial intelligence is a tool rather than a substitute for labor. As artificial intelligence enters the field of human work, people have gradually discovered that artificial intelligence is incapable of unique tasks, and the advantage of human beings is to understand uniqueness and use tools rationally. At this time, human-machine reciprocal work came into being. Brandão discovers that people can form organic partnerships with machines. “Humans enable machines to do what they do best: doing repetitive tasks, analyzing significant volumes of data, and dealing with routine cases. Due to reciprocity, machines enable humans to have their potentialities "strengthened" for tasks such as resolving ambiguous information, exercising the judgment of difficult cases, and contacting dissatisfied clients.” Daugherty and Wilson have observed successful new types of human-computer interaction in occupations and tasks in various fields. In other words, even in activities and capabilities that are considered simpler, new technologies will not pose an imminent danger to workers. As far as General Electric is concerned, buyers of it and its equipment will always need maintenance workers. Entrepreneurs need these workers to work well with new systems that can integrate their skills with advanced technologies in novel ways. 

Artificial intelligence has sped up the hiring process considerably, dramatically reducing costs. For example, Unilever has reviewed over 250,000 applications using AI and reduced its hiring process from 4 months to 4 weeks. This saved the company 50,000 hours of labor.

