As defined by the 21st Century Cures Act in 2016, a medical device is a device that performs a function in healthcare with the intention of using it "in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other animals, or intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals".

Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, all AI systems falling within this definition are regulated by the FDA. Medical devices are classified into three classes by the FDA based on their uses and risks. The higher the risk is, the stricter the control. The Class I category includes devices with the smallest risk and Class III has the greatest risk. As technology continues to improve, it has rapidly increased the medical fields' method of working and diagnosing. Various AI applications can improve productivity and reduce medical errors, such as diagnoses and treatment selection, and creating risk predictions and stratifying diseases.

AI also helps patients by providing patients' data, electronic health records, mobile apps, and providing easy access to devices and sensors to specific patients who are in need of such technologies. The need to protect patients' data is extreme. Using electronic records to conceal patient data becomes increasingly difficult as data becomes integrated into clinical care. The accessibility to patients' data may be easy to access for the patient, but it also brings skepticism of data protection.

Technology and AI have combined to provide opportunities for better management of healthcare information and technology integration in the medical industry. AI is implemented to recognize abnormalities and suspicion to sensitive data being accessed by a third-party. On the other hand, it will be necessary to rethink confidentiality and other core medical ethics principles in order to implement deep learning systems, since we cannot rely solely on technology. In conceiving, developing, operating, and maintaining cloud computing systems, it adopts a systematic approach to commercialization, standardization, and governance. Among its diverse aspects are contributions from development engineering, software engineering, web development, performance engineering, security engineering, platform engineering, risk engineering, and quality engineering.

Implementing AI into information technology's framework to establish smooth workloads and automate repetitive processes. Using these tools, organizations can better manage data as they develop greater amounts of collective data and integrate data recognition, classification, and management processes as time progresses.

With AI, it can bring efficiency to organizations, bringing strategic methods and saving time from repeated tasks. By executing analysis, organizations can save time and be more efficient.

