Main|Mind uploading}}
One possible approach to achieving AGI is whole brain emulation: A brain model is built by brain scanning|scanning and Brain mapping|mapping a biological brain in detail, and then copying and simulating it on a computer system or another computational device. The computer simulation|simulation model must be sufficiently faithful to the original, so that it behaves in practically the same way as the original brain. Whole brain emulation is discussed in computational neuroscience and neuroinformatics, in the context of brain simulation for medical research purposes. It has been discussed in artificial intelligence research as an approach to strong AI. Neuroimaging technologies that could deliver the necessary detailed understanding are improving rapidly, and futurist Ray Kurzweil in the book ''The Singularity Is Near'' The Blue Brain project used one of the fastest supercomputer architectures, IBM's Blue Gene platform, to create a real time simulation of a single rat Neocortex|neocortical column consisting of approximately 10,000 neurons and 10<sup>8</sup> synapses in 2006. A longer-term goal is to build a detailed, functional simulation of the physiological processes in the human brain: "It is not impossible to build a human brain and we can do it in 10 years," Henry Markram, director of the Blue Brain Project, said in 2009 at the TED (conference)|TED conference in Oxford. Neuro-silicon interfaces have been proposed as an alternative implementation strategy that may scale better.

Hans Moravec addressed the above arguments ("brains are more complicated", "neurons have to be modeled in more detail") in his 1997 paper "When will computer hardware match the human brain?". He measured the ability of existing software to simulate the functionality of neural tissue, specifically the retina. His results do not depend on the number of glial cells, nor on what kinds of processing neurons perform where.

The actual complexity of modeling biological neurons has been explored in OpenWorm|OpenWorm project that aimed at complete simulation of a worm that has only 302 neurons in its neural network (among about 1000 cells in total). The animal's neural network was well documented before the start of the project. However, although the task seemed simple at the beginning, the models based on a generic neural network did not work. Currently, efforts focus on precise emulation of biological neurons (partly on the molecular level), but the result cannot yet be called a total success.

In 2023, researchers performed a high-resolution scan of a mouse brain.

