Main|Agriculture}}
Many agricultural operations are automated with Agricultural machinery|machinery and equipment to improve their diagnosis, decision-making and/or performing. Agricultural automation can relieve the drudgery of agricultural work, improve the timeliness and precision of agricultural operations, raise productivity and resource-use efficiency, build resilience, and improve food quality and safety. Increased productivity can free up labour, allowing agricultural households to spend more time elsewhere.

The technological evolution in agriculture has resulted in progressive shifts to digital equipment and robotics. With digital automation technologies, it also becomes possible to automate diagnosis and decision-making of agricultural operations. Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region where the adoption of motorized mechanization has stalled over the past decades. but adoption is likely mostly in Northern Europe, and likely almost absent in low- and middle-income countries.
File:016 Coca-Cola vending machine at Kyoto Station, Japan - コカコーラ 自動販売機.JPG|thumb|A soft drink [[vending machine in Japan, an example of automated retail]] Online shopping could be considered a form of automated retail as the payment and checkout are through an automated online transaction processing system, with the share of online retail accounting jumping from 5.1% in 2011 to 8.3% in 2016.  However, two-thirds of books, music, and films are now purchased online. In addition, automation and online shopping could reduce demands for shopping malls, and retail property, which in the USA is currently estimated to account for 31% of all commercial property or around . Amazon (company)|Amazon has gained much of the growth in recent years for online shopping, accounting for half of the growth in online retail in 2016. The University of Texas at Austin has introduced fully automated cafe retail locations. Some Cafes and restaurants have utilized mobile and tablet "Mobile app|apps" to make the ordering process more efficient by customers ordering and paying on their device. Some restaurants have automated food delivery to tables of customers using a Conveyor belt sushi|Conveyor belt system. The use of robots is sometimes employed to replace waiting staff.

