Baidu competes with Sogou, Google Search, Qihoo|360 Search (www.so.com), Yahoo! China, Microsoft's Bing (search engine)|Bing and MSN Messenger, Sina.com|Sina, NetEase's Youdao and PaiPai, Alibaba Group|Alibaba's Taobao, TOM Online, DuckDuckGo, and EachNet.

Baidu is the most used search engine in China, controlling 76.05 percent of China's market share. The List of countries by number of Internet users|number of Internet users in China had reached 705 million by the end of  2015, according to a report by the internetlivestats.com.

In an August 2010 ''Wall Street Journal'' article, Baidu played down its benefit from Google's having moved its China search service to Hong Kong, but Baidu's share of revenue in China's search-advertising market grew six percentage points in the second quarter to 70%, according to Beijing-based research firm Analysys International.

It is also evident that Baidu is attempting to enter the Internet social network market. , it is discussing the possibility of working with Facebook, which would lead to a Chinese version of the international social network, managed by Baidu. This plan, if executed, would face off Baidu with competition from the three popular Chinese social networks Qzone, Renren and Kaixin001 as well as induce rivalry with instant-messaging giant, Tencent QQ.

On 22 February 2012, Hudong submitted a complaint to the State Administration for Industry and Commerce asking for a review of the behavior of Baidu, accusing it of being monopolistic.

By August 2014, Baidu's search market share in China has dropped to 56.3%, where Qihoo 360, its closest competitor who has rebranded its search engine as so.com, has increased its market share to 29.0%, according to report from CNZZ.com.

In February 2015, Baidu was alleged to use anticompetitive tactics in Brazil against the Brazilian online security firm PSafe and Qihoo 360 (the largest investor of PSafe).

In an ongoing competition in AI natural language processing called General Language Understanding Evaluation, otherwise known as GLUE, Baidu took a lead over Microsoft and Google in December 2019.

