Black & White'' took over three years to develop beginning on 14 February 1998, and was released on 27 March 2001. Peter Molyneux funded the project himself and devoted his entire focus to its development. Molyneux stated that he tried to correct the mistakes he made with the game design of ''Dungeon Keeper''. The goal was to develop a unique game where players felt they inhabited a world where they could do anything. Molyneux had liked the idea of controlling people as a god since his previous venture, ''Populous (video game)|Populous''. He was interested in the concept of good and evil and thought that this could be used to influence the game's atmosphere. Development was slow, starting with only six people, as Molyneux wanted to assemble the right team. Discussions about concepts (including a Mafia-style game) began at his house in 1997, and in February 1998, the team moved into Lionhead's offices. The expanded nine-person team exchanged further suggestions for the game and its content, such as Lip sync|lip-synchronised characters, although this was thought impossible. As more people joined, Molyneux wanted Lionhead Studios|Lionhead's friendly atmosphere to remain, and their policy of only recruiting people who could fit in with existing members meant that the team had developed their own way of working. According to Molyneux, team members questioned and competed with each other, resulting in a better quality of work. He said that "the team did the work of a group twice their number." The group that finally produced the game numbered twenty-five programmers with a budget of approximately £4 million.

Molyneux stated that ''King Kong (1933 film)|King Kong'' was an inspiration for the game. Soon afterwards, watching the ''The Outer Limits (1995 TV series)|Outer Limits'' episode "The Sandkings", he noticed that the episode featured bug-like creatures worshipping a scientist, and who moved around him in reverence whenever he was nearby. Molyneux thought that being admired with that level of devotion made one a god. Molyneux told ''Official Dreamcast Magazine (UK magazine)|Official Dreamcast Magazine'' that he had sought to recreate the "fantastic feeling" of destroying Ant colony|ant nests as a child.

In 1998, ''Black & White'' was shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo|E3 trade show in Atlanta, Georgia, and incorporated elements of ''Populous'' and ''Dungeon Keeper''. Molyneux estimated the game would be nearly finished in 1999, and scheduled it for a late September 2000 release. Artificial intelligence (video games)|Artificial intelligence was one of the key areas still being worked on. The game Crash (computing)|crashed multiple times; Molyneux fixed the Software bug|bugs using Microsoft Visual Studio|Microsoft Developer Studio before restarting. He expected the 3D Game engine|engine used would be an improvement when compared to his previous games. He instructed the programmers to "Make it the most beautiful engine ever conceived by anybody, ever". As of December 1998, no animators had been hired, and the art team were developing their own skills in that area. By this time, the engine was being developed by three people: Alex Evans (video game developer)|Alex Evans, Jean-Claude Cuttier, and Scawen Roberts (who had joined from a courier company called, coincidentally, Black And White). Cottier developed the landscape system, and found a method of generating textures, enabling the reflection of various types of terrain. Roberts created the creatures and the animation (Eric Bailey later took over the creature animations). Evans described developing the engine as "a daunting task". Composer Russell Shaw (composer)|Russell Shaw came up with the idea of the world changing appearance according to the player's alignment: he suggested that the player's territory loses colour if he plays evil, and for it to be gaily coloured if good. Artist Mark Healey wanted the cursor to be a magician's hand.). Molyneux wanted "limitless flexibility" and the ability to zoom out to see the world from the sky. It was decided to make the player a god when it was realised that humans could not wield the powers that were being implemented. The spells that were to be cast became miracles, and the wizards' supporters became worshippers. The mechanic of turning living beings into Titans was dropped because of problems with balance, with certain Titans having advantages over others. After the name Titans was dropped, others were considered, including Sards, Demes, Ikons, Psiphs, and Amalians. None had unanimous support, so they ended up being called 'creatures'. Elements of the Wizard theme, such as Temples resembling a wizard's tower, remain in the final game. Temples were originally named Citadels and some sported a medieval, fairy-tale look.

In January 1999, Richard Evans was working out how the game judges the morality of the player's behaviour. Mark Webley (who had programmed the creature's artificial intelligence on a testbed version) had become project manager, ensuring routines were listed on task schedules. He stated that this was "a hundred times more difficult" than similar tasks at Bullfrog Productions. ''Black & White'' was shown at E3 1999 where it was judged the most original game. At this time, Lionhead were considering 15 cover designs provided by Electronic Arts.

At E3 2000, Molyneux gave a precise release date: 23 September 2000. The game was supposed to reach the Software release life cycle#Alpha|alpha stage by 18 June, but by summer, it became clear that development was behind schedule, and the release date was pushed back to 10 November. In September, it was pushed back again into 2001, angering fans who were eagerly awaiting its release. Molyneux apologised for the delay. By September 2000, every Lionhead member had their faces digitised for use on villagers. Villagers were auctioned online at QXL.com|QXL, with all proceeds going to the National Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children. The team were surprised when the first one sold for £450, and the fourth one for over £1000. By October, Lionhead were operating around the clock to reach alpha. Shin Kanaoya of EA Square came to discuss the Japanese localisation, which was considered difficult due to the requirement of the use of two-byte characters to display the Japanese writing system, particularly the 20,000 Kanji characters, which would have posed RAM management issues. Lionhead were considering using the Japanese fonts included with Windows. In September, there were "dozens" of fansites about ''Black & White''. Molyneux later said that ''Black & White'' was amongst the first video games to have fansites, and that Lionhead were accused of over-promising when the sites described features the game did not have when shown. He stated that they went from "bizarre ideas", to "the best game I have ever seen". The villagers' artificial intelligence had to be restricted by giving some control to the Village Centre as there was no limit on the number of villagers. Molyneux said of the creature's artificial intelligence, "part of the game itself learns from everything you do and tailors itself to you", and described the creature as "an astonishing piece of work". He also commented that the last months of development were "the hardest any of us has ever had to work", and that "without the right team, this game never would have happened." Clan multiplayer, where multiple players play as one god, was developed in a rush; its interface had to be developed in two weeks. ''Black & White''s online community was handled by two servers in London, where the clan creatures were stored to minimise the possibility of cheating.

Alpha was reached in December 2000. Multiplayer mode nearly had to be dropped for this to happen, but the problems were fixed just in time. Electronic Arts became involved in the production; testers were employed (they found three thousand bugs), localisations were checked, and a marketing campaign was launched. Fearing the bugs could kill the game, lists were sent to every member of the team, who had a chart, updated daily. The biggest problem was the final set, and fixing them created more bugs. Molyneux commented that "It was as if the game just didn't want to be finished and perfected", and remarked that the team felt like they had run a marathon after fixing the bugs. The end product was so large that they "almost felt lost within the code" which consisted of over a million lines, and took over an hour to Compiler|compile. The music, dialogue, and sound effects were compressed to fit on one Compact disc|CD, as they took five times as much space as the game. People not involved with the game's development began playing it and were extremely impressed. The release date was then set at 23 February 2001. Electronic Arts complained that the age at which the villagers were reproducing was below the age of consent for some countries, so this had to be changed. Lionhead announced that the game Software release life cycle#Release to manufacturing (RTM)|went gold (became ready to be released) on 16 March 2001. Molyneux credited fans for making the hardest times worthwhile. Because players encountered technical issues, rumours that Electronic Arts had shipped beta versions circulated; Lionhead denied them. Molyneux said ''Black & White'' was the most important and difficult game he had made. In June, a Patch (computing)|patch that fixed bugs was released. The Japanese version was released on 24 May 2001, and re-released as ''Black & White Special Edition''}} under the EA Best Selections branding on 18 March 2004. Another patch was released, which would allow the Hand to be controlled by an P5 glove|Essential Reality P5 Glove, a virtual reality glove.

