Customers are reportedly using Cerebras technologies in the pharmaceutical, life sciences, and energy sectors.

In 2020, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) began using the Cerebras CS-1 AI system in their London AI hub, for neural network models to accelerate genetic and genomic research and reduce the time taken in drug discovery. The GSK research team was able to increase the complexity of the encoder models they could generate, while reducing training time. Other pharmaceutical industry customers include AstraZeneca, who was able to reduce training time from two weeks on a cluster of GPUs to two days using the Cerebras CS-1 system. GSK and Cerebras recently co-published [https://arxiv.org/pdf/2112.07571.pdf research] in December 2021 on epigenomic language models.

Argonne National Laboratory has been using the CS-1 since 2020 in COVID-19 research and cancer tumor research based on the world’s largest cancer treatment database. A series of models running on the CS-1 to predict cancer drug response to tumors achieved speed-ups of many hundreds of times on the CS-1 compared to their GPU baselines. 

The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory|Lawrence Livermore National Lab’s Lassen supercomputer incorporated the CS-1 in both classified and non-classified areas for physics simulations. The Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC) has also incorporated the CS-1 in their Neocortex supercomputer for dual HPC and AI workloads. Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre|EPCC, the supercomputing center of the University of Edinburgh, has also deployed a CS-1 system for AI-based research.

In August 2021, Cerebras announced a partnership with [https://www.peptilogics.com Peptilogics] on the development of AI for peptide therapeutics.

In March 2022, Cerebras announced that the Company deployed its CS-2 system in the Houston facilities of TotalEnergies, its first publicly disclosed customer in the energy sector.

In May 2022, Cerebras announced that the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) has deployed the Cerebras CS-2 system in their HOLL-I supercomputer.  They also announced that the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ) in Germany plans to deploy a new supercomputer featuring the CS-2 system along with the HPE Superdome Flex server. The new supercomputing system is expected to be delivered to LRZ this summer. This will be the first CS-2 system deployment in Europe. The multi-year contract will be executed through Sandia National Laboratories, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory|Lawrence Livermore National Lab, and Los Alamos National Laboratory.

The 2022 Gordon Bell Special Prize Winner for HPC-Based COVID-19 Research, which honors outstanding research achievement towards the understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic through the use of high-performance computing, used Cerebras' CS-2 system to conduct this award-winning research to transform large language models to analyze COVID-19 variants. The paper was authored by a 34-person team from Argonne National Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Harvard University, Northern Illinois University, Technical University of Munich, University of Chicago, University of Illinois Chicago, Nvidia, and Cerebras. ANL noted that using the CS-2 Wafer-Scale Engine cluster, the team was able to achieve convergence when training on the full SARS-CoV-2 genomes in less than a day. 

