Theories of creativity (and empirical investigation of why some people are more creative than others) have focused on a variety of aspects. The dominant factors are usually identified as "the four Ps", a framework first put forward by James Melvin Rhodes|Mel Rhodes:
;process:A focus on ''process'' is shown in cognitive approaches that try to describe thought mechanisms and techniques for creative thinking. Theories invoking Divergent thinking|divergent rather than convergent thinking (such as that of J. P. Guilford|Guilford), or those describing the staging of the creative process (such as that of Graham Wallas|Wallas) are primarily theories of the creative process.
;product:A focus on a creative ''product'' usually attempts to assess creative output, whether for psychometrics (see below) or in understanding why some objects are considered creative. It is from a consideration of product that the standard definition of creativity as the production of something novel and useful arises.
;person:A focus on the nature of the creative ''person'' considers more general intellectual habits, such as openness, levels of Ideation (creative process)|ideation, autonomy, expertise, exploratory behavior, and so on.
;press/place:A focus on ''place'' (sometimes called ''press'') considers the circumstances in which creativity flourishes, such as degrees of autonomy, access to resources, and the nature of gatekeepers. Creative lifestyles are characterized by nonconforming attitudes and behaviors, as well as flexibility.

In 2013, based on a sociocultural critique of the Four P model as individualistic, static, and decontextualized, Vlad Petre Glǎveanu proposed a "five A's" model consisting of actor, action, artifact, audience, and affordance. In this model, the ''actor'' is the person with attributes, but also located within social networks; ''action'' is the process of creativity not only in internal cognitive terms, but also external, bridging the gap between Ideation (creative process)|ideation and implementation; ''artifact'' emphasizes how creative products typically represent cumulative innovations over time rather than abrupt discontinuities; and "press/place" is divided into ''audience'' and ''affordance'', which consider the interdependence of the creative individual with the social and material world respectively. Although not supplanting the four Ps model in creativity research, the five As model has exerted influence over the direction of some creativity research, and has been credited with bringing coherence to studies across a number of creative domains.

