Despite the lukewarm reception of the ''Alien'' prequel films, Michael Fassbender's portrayal of David was met with critical acclaim, with his performance generally considered to be the standout. Following the critics screening of ''Prometheus'' in May 2012, critics from a number of media companies, including /Film and ''Screen International'', proclaimed Fassbender to have been the highlight of the film. Forrest Wickman of ''Slate'' magazine lauded Fassbender for being able to emulate uncanny valley through his mannerisms alone and ranked David as being the greatest portrayal of an android to date. Philip French from ''The Guardian'' praised the character for being a cross between the fictional valet Jeeves, created by P. G. Wodehouse, and a double agent commonly found in an English Renaissance theatre production. French further complimented the character for paying homage to T. E. Lawrence by being portrayed as a control freak caught between two cultures- the parallel in ''Prometheus'' being that David is caught between humanity and synthetics. Referencing the Titan (mythology)|Titan Prometheus of Greek mythology, Kwaak Je-yup stated in his review of ''Prometheus'' that Fassbender "steals fire" in every scene, upstaging Noomi Rapace's leading performance as Elizabeth Shaw (character)|Shaw.

David's character arc throughout the ''Alien'' prequel series, with his role becoming increasingly central, has been lauded by critics. Kevin Lincoln of New York (magazine)|''Vulture'' magazine described David as being the best cinematic villain in years, due to his dynamic personality and ability to win against the characters in ''Alien: Covenant''. John Squires of Bloody Disgusting praised David for supplanting the main protagonist of the first four films, Ellen Ripley, as the overall best character of the franchise in 2017. Squires perceived David's passion to become a creator in ''Alien: Covenant'' as a retroactive explanation for poisoning Holloway in ''Prometheus''. Eschewing most reviews, Wenlei Ma from News.com.au complimented Fassbender's ability to portray David, though she criticized the mystery lost by revealing the character's true intentions.

