File:NASA Journey to Mars and “The Martian” (201508180030HQ).jpg|thumb|right|upright|Sir Ridley Scott maintains artificial intelligence as a central theme throughout his career, with several forms of androids present in his films prior to the creation of David.

A hallmark of director Sir Ridley Scott is the theme of artificial intelligence present in his science fiction films. Scott's earliest foray into the philosophy of artificial intelligence was with the android character Ash (Alien)|Ash, in the original ''Alien (film)|Alien'' film released in 1979. Ian Holm portrayed Ash as a character who may uncannily assume a human form, yet he maintains a sense of superiority that is only humbled by the nature of the Alien, which runs counter to the very future of the human race. In the book ''The Culture and Philosophy of Ridley Scott'', the authors (Adam Barkman, Ashley Barkman, and Nancy Kang) reason that though Ash is designed to appear human, his innards are bio-mechanical and he himself does not presume to be a sentient being with a semblance of life, but an artificial construct whose personality is dictated by machinery. Every subsequent installment in the ''Alien'' film series directed by Scott features at least one synthetic (android) character designated to maintain order aboard their respective space ship. In 2017, Scott explained that the synthetics featured in the ''Alien'' films he directed are designed to subvert their robotic nature and to impeccably mimic humans. The original form of androids introduced in ''Alien'' would contradict the observable nature of David in ''Prometheus''; though both would serve the same corporate masters and have the same non-human innards, David would identify himself as a sentient entity who is capable of expressing—if not feeling—emotion.

In between the time Scott released ''Alien'' in 1979 and returned to the franchise with ''Prometheus'' in 2012, he directed another notable science fiction film concerning artificial intelligence, ''Blade Runner'', in 1982. Contrary to the white-blooded androids of ''Alien'' that emulate emotions and recognize a disconnect with humanity, ''Blade Runner'' features the replicants, enhanced biorobotics|biorobotic humanoids that may only be identified by their lacking emotions. In order to maintain control, the replicants' human creators install false memories that detail entire lives that give them a sense of identity. ''Blade Runner'', an influential film, has prompted a slew of philosophical questions concerning artificial intelligence and whether or not an android could truly be considered alive. The film specifically questions whether thoughts, a sense of identity, emotions and consciousness in general, may be something genuine when applied to artificial intelligence. Due to David identifying himself as a living entity—similar to the replicants—film critics in 2012 would come not to only question if ''Prometheus'' was a direct prequel to ''Alien'', but if the film had a relation to ''Blade Runner''.

A number of models for testing artificial intelligence have been noted by philosophers as being relevant to the themes present in Scott's filmography. The test most commonly associated with artificial intelligence in his work is the Turing test, created by the British computer scientist Alan Turing. Turing's argument was that there is no significant difference between a human and an android, which would be apparent when a human would be unable to identify if the individual they are communicating with is a human or android. In ''Blade Runner'', the method for identifying the physically identical replicants is by administering the fictional Voight-Kampff test, which detects disparities in emotional responses. Though a replicant would fail the Turing test, an android at the chronological marker of ''Alien'', such as Ash, would likely perform exceedingly well. Additionally, the Chinese room, created by John Searle, has been postured as a test relevant to the androids of the ''Alien'' franchise. As the test determines if someone can identify what ''is'' Chinese lettering without knowing what it ''means'', philosophers have drawn a parallel to Ash, who may uncannily emulate a human, though fail to understand what it means to be one. Kang described David's eventual introduction as another android character created by Scott as a synthesis between both ''Alien'' and ''Blade Runner'', with the character being capable of passing the Turing test like Ash, yet also able to pass the Chinese room test like a replicant, implying that he would indeed be the first ''living'' android of the ''Alien'' franchise.

