Writer Jon Spaihts created David as a shipboard android in the first draft of his screenplay for the prequel ''Alien: Engineers'', as an exploration of the theme of creations and being in the presence of one's makers. Just as the humans aboard the ''Prometheus'' look to discover the secrets of their creators, the Engineers, David is already in the presence of his creators. Unlike his companions and android successors, David would be disillusioned by his creators and look to fashion himself into an entity defying their nature. Scott was in favor of the concept and urged writer Damon Lindelof to pursue it further while rewriting the script that would be adapted as ''Prometheus (2012 film)|Prometheus''.

With relation to the human characters, David was conceptualized as not only a surrogate son for Peter Weyland, but as a replacement for Weyland's estranged daughter, Meredith Vickers. The actress who portrayed Vickers, Charlize Theron, detailed that Scott perceived Weyland's family and his company, the Weyland Corporation, as being male-dominated, with Vickers' shared DNA being the only attachment. This runs counter to David, who is a synthetic male created to supplant Vickers and uphold the family's patriarchy. Fassbender was provided with a significant amount of free rein for modeling the character as he saw fit. Rather than taking inspiration from the previous ''Alien'' installments, Fassbender studied Sean Young's character Rachael, a replicant in ''Blade Runner'', noting her vacant demeanor. Fassbender drew inspiration from a number of other film performances, including Douglas Rain as HAL 9000 in ''2001: A Space Odyssey (film)|2001: A Space Odyssey'', David Bowie in ''The Man Who Fell to Earth (film)|The Man Who Fell to Earth'', and Dirk Bogarde in ''The Servant (1963 film)|The Servant''. Additionally, Fassbender modeled his walk around American Olympic diver Greg Louganis.

In the screenplay for ''Prometheus'', David is noted as being unusually fond of the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia (film)|''Lawrence of Arabia'', with the character viewing parallels to himself, as they both have unfaltering pursuits of the objectives. As such, Fassbender elected to model much of his performance and appearance around the Peter O'Toole depiction of T. E. Lawrence. Fassbender would continue to have his role make references to ''Lawrence of Arabia'' in ''Alien: Covenant'' by having David play samplings of the soundtrack on his flute. For his first appearance in ''Prometheus'', Fassbender, a natural redhead, dyed his hair blond and fashioned it into a style influenced by Lawrence. Scott requested that Fassbender dye his hair for the role, in order to provide the character with an otherworldly and unsettling appearance.

