Decision intelligence is based on the recognition that, in many organizations, decision-making could be improved if a more structured approach were used. Decision intelligence seeks to overcome a decision-making "complexity ceiling", which is characterized by a mismatch between the sophistication of organizational decision-making practices and the complexity of situations in which those decisions must be made. As such, it seeks to solve some of the issues identified around complexity theory and organizations.

In this sense, decision intelligence represents a practical application of the field of complex systems, which helps organizations to navigate the complex systems in which they find themselves. Decision intelligence can also be thought of as a framework that brings advanced analytics and machine learning techniques to the desktop of the non-expert decision maker, as well as incorporating, and then extending, data science to overcome the problems articulated in black swan theory.

Decision intelligence proponents believe that many organizations continue to make poor decisions. In response, decision intelligence seeks to unify a number of decision-making best practices, described in more detail below.

Decision intelligence builds on the insight that it is possible to ''design'' the decision itself, using principles previously used for designing more tangible objects like bridges and buildings.

The use of a ''visual'' design language representing decisions (see ) is an important element of decision intelligence, since it provides an intuitive common language readily understood by all decision participants. A Visual thinking|visual metaphor improves the ability to reason about complex systems as well as to enhance collaboration.

In addition to visual decision design, there are other two aspects of engineering disciplines that aid mass adoption. These are:
#the creation of a shared language of design elements and
#the use of a common methodology or process, as illustrated in the diagram above.

