Deepfakes rely on a type of Artificial neural network|neural network called an autoencoder. These consist of an encoder, which reduces an image to a lower dimensional latent space, and a decoder, which reconstructs the image from the latent representation. Deepfakes utilize this architecture by having a universal encoder which encodes a person in to the latent space. The latent representation contains key features about their facial features and body posture. This can then be decoded with a model trained specifically for the target. Both algorithms improve constantly in a Zero-sum game|zero sum game. The use of AI technology was a major issue in the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike, as new techniques enabled the capability of generating and storing a digital likeness to use in place of actors.

Disney has improved their visual effects using high-resolution deepfake face swapping technology. Disney improved their technology through progressive training programmed to identify facial expressions, implementing a face-swapping feature, and iterating in order to stabilize and refine the output. Disney's deepfake generation model can produce AI-generated media at a 1024 x 1024 resolution, as opposed to common models that produce media at a 256 x 256 resolution. Similar technology was initially used by fans to unofficially insert faces into existing media, such as  overlaying Harrison Ford's young face onto Han Solo's face in ''Solo: A Star Wars Story''. Disney used deepfakes for the characters of Princess Leia and Grand Moff Tarkin in ''Rogue One.''

The 2020 documentary ''Welcome to Chechnya'' used deepfake technology to obscure the identity of the people interviewed, so as to protect them from retaliation.

Creative Artists Agency has developed a facility to capture the likeness of an actor "in a single day", to develop a digital clone of the actor, which would be controlled by the actor or their estate alongside other personality rights.  

Companies which have used digital clones of professional actors in advertisements include Puma (brand)|Puma, Nike, Inc.|Nike and Procter & Gamble. 

