When fourth-grader Bebe Stevens extols the romantic texts written to her by Clyde Donovan, classmate Wendy Testaburger complains to her boyfriend, Stan Marsh, that his replies to her messages consist of merely a thumbs up. Clyde tells Stan about ChatGPT, an AI-based app he uses to write the texts, but cautions Stan not to tell anyone else about it. Stan relies on the app to text Wendy while engaging in other activities. Wendy is buoyed by Stan's more heartfelt texts, though he cannot truthfully answer her questions about them.

Stan and Clyde also use the app to write their school essays, as do their classmates Eric Cartman and Butters Stotch. Cartman complains that more students learning about it would cost them their advantage, and their teacher, Mr. Garrison, would learn they cheated. Meanwhile, Garrison laments to his partner, Rick, that he now has to work harder to grade and comment on his students' essays. Rick tells him about ChatGPT, but instead of realizing that his students used it for essays, Garrison realizes he can use it to grade them. He thanks Rick for his supportive replies to his texts.

School counselor Mr. Mackey informs Stan's class that a student used OpenAI technology for schoolwork. A "technician" dressed as a Falconry|falconer arrives with his falcon Shadowbane to analyze the students' work and identify the cheater. Stan and Garrison confess to each other that they used ChatGPT. They rationalize that it is merely akin to having a good writer's assistant, but when Garrison learns this can be used for texting, he is angered to realize that Rick used it to text him. The technician reveals Shadowbane detected chatbot writing in Wendy's cell phone, though she denies using the app. Worrying he cannot think of a way out of this, Stan instructs ChatGPT to write a story that is resolved when he convinces everyone that it is okay that he lied about using the app, and that tech companies who monetize OpenAI should not determine the ethical limits of AI. The remainder of the episode depicts this story and that resolution. Stan decides that sometimes a thumbs up from a human is better than machine-generated lies, but when Clyde asks Stan how he pulled this off, Stan simply explains, "ChatGPT, dude." 

In the closing credits, the writers of the episode are credited as both Trey Parker and ChatGPT.

