Main|Deep Blue versus Garry Kasparov}}
File:Kasparov Magath 1985 Hamburg-2.png|thumb|[[Garry Kasparov playing a simultaneous exhibition in 1985]]

Subsequent to its predecessor Deep Thought's 1989 loss to Garry Kasparov, Deep Blue played Kasparov twice more. In the first game of the first match, which took place from 10 to 17 February 1996, Deep Blue became the first machine to win Deep Blue versus Kasparov, 1996, Game 1|a chess game against a reigning world champion under Rules of chess|regular time controls. However, Kasparov won three and drew two of the following five games, beating Deep Blue by 4–2 at the close of the match.

Deep Blue's hardware was subsequently upgraded, doubling its speed before it faced Kasparov again in May 1997, when it won the six-game rematch 3½–2½. Deep Blue won the Deep Blue versus Kasparov, 1997, Game 6|deciding game after Kasparov failed to secure his position in the opening, thereby becoming the first computer system to defeat a reigning world champion in a match under standard chess tournament time controls. David Levy (chess player)|David Levy and Monty Newborn estimate that each additional Ply (game theory)|ply (half-move) of forward insight increases the playing strength between 50 and 70 Elo rating system|Elo points.

In the 44th move of the first game of their second match, unknown to Kasparov, a Software bug|bug in Deep Blue's code led it to enter an unintentional Control flow#Count-controlled loops|loop, which it exited by taking a randomly selected valid move. Subsequently, Kasparov experienced a decline in performance in the following game, though he denies this was due to anxiety in the wake of Deep Blue's inscrutable move.

After his loss, Kasparov said that he sometimes saw unusual creativity in the machine's moves, suggesting that during the second game, human chess players had intervened on behalf of the machine. IBM denied this, saying the only human intervention occurred between games. Kasparov demanded a rematch, but IBM had dismantled Deep Blue after its victory and refused the rematch. The rules allowed the developers to modify the program between games, an opportunity they said they used to shore up weaknesses in the computer's play that were revealed during the course of the match. Kasparov requested printouts of the machine's log files, but IBM refused, although the company later published the logs on the Internet.

