Design justice in Human–computer interaction|Human-Computer Interaction (or HCI) is a branch of design justice focused on the principles of design for digital interfaces. Not only does design justice in HCI include the development of accessible websites and interfaces, but it also reexamines the core principles and practices that HCI designers rely on. The goal of design justice in UI/UX is to increase the usability of interfaces and products by focusing on the needs of marginalized communities in the design process.

Design justice principles encourage designers to involve the user in the design process more in order to work towards this goal. One such strategy of increased user involvement is participatory design. This entails finding a set of users to test the product, surveying them on their experience with the product, and adjusting the product design to accommodate for feedback. For this strategy to follow design justice principles, the pool of users should include representation for various marginalized communities. Another strategy, co-design, involves users from marginalized communities throughout the development process. In contrast to participatory design, users actively participate in the design lifecycle and directly contribute their experiences to the product. This lessens the divide between designers and users, allowing both to have equal ownership and contribution to the product. Co-design also encourages designers and users alike to recognize and understand their identity and how it may impact the product outcome. The core of both participatory design and co-design strategies is for designers to be empathetic and educated in order to empower all users through the use of interfaces and technological experiences.

Another issue that Costanza-Chock highlights is intersectionality. When designers consider equality during development, most employ a single-axis framework, leading to most interfaces ignoring the complex identities of marginalized peoples.<ref name=":0" /> HCI principles encourage the early determination of the users and tasks that a user interface will support, and principles of design justice, like principles 2 and 6, place the unique identities of individuals at the forefront of creating user interfaces. Costanza-Chock also emphasizes the affect that design justice has on the empowerment and participation of marginalized peoples. Many organizations have been created to support gender equality in STEM fields.<ref name=":0" /> Design justice recognizes that employment in paid design fields for marginalized people is important, but that other aspects of design, like the intended beneficiaries of design, are equally as important.<ref name=":0" /><ref name=":1" />

