Main|Digital native}}
File:Digital Natives in Car.png|thumb|Digital natives using a smart car
Marc Prensky invented and popularized the terms digital natives and digital imigrants. A digital native is an individual born into the digital age who adopts the appropriate skills later in life. A digital immigrant refers to an individual who adopts technology later in life. These two groups of people have had different interactions with technology since birth, a generational gap. This directly links to their individual and unique relationship with digital literacy. Digital natives brought the creation of ubiquitous information systems (UIS). These systems include mobile phones, laptop computers and personal digital assistants, as well as digital to cars and buildings (smart cars and smart homes), creating a new unique technological experience.

Carr claims that digital immigrants, although they adapt to the same technology as natives, possess a sort of "accent" that prevents them from communicating the way natives do. Research shows that, due to the brain's malleable nature, technology has changed the way today's students read, perceive, and process information. Marc Prensky believes this is a problem, because today's students have a vocabulary and skill set that educators (digital immigrants at the time of his writing), may not fully understand. Conversely, internet activity reached almost 100% among its 15 to 24-year-old citizens. One study conducted by Margaryan, Littlejohn, and Vojt (2011), found that while college students born after 1984 frequently used the internet and other digital technology, they showed restricted use of technologies for educational and socializing purposes. It is now necessary to implement digital technology in education; and are just two common tools that facilitate modern education.  Digital technology has impacted the way materials are taught in the classroom. With the use of technology rising in this century, educators are altering traditional forms of teaching to include course material on concepts related to digital literacy.
File:Student on computer.jpg|thumb|Student working on assignment using computer
Educators have also turned to social media platforms to communicate and share ideas with one another. Restrictions such as time and location can be overcome with the use of social media-based education.

The COVID-19 pandemic pushed education into a more digital and online experience where teachers had to adapt to new levels of digital competency in software to continue the education system. different online meeting platforms were utilized for communication. An estimated 84% of the global student body was affected by this sudden closure due to the pandemic. Because of this, there was a clear disparity in student and school preparedness for digital education due, in large part, to a divide in digital skills and literacy that both the students and educators experienced. For example, countries like Croatia had already begun work on digitalizing its schools countrywide. In a pilot initiative, 920 instructors and over 6,000 pupils from 151 schools received computers, tablets, and presentation equipment, as well as improved connection and teacher training, so that when the pandemic struck, pilot schools were ready to begin offering online programs within two days.

The switch to online learning has brought about some concerns regarding learning effectiveness, exposure to cyber risks, and lack of socialization. These prompted the need to implement changes in how students can learn much-needed digital skills and develop digital literacy. Attention and focus was also brought to the development of digital literacy in higher education.

A study in Spain measured the digital knowledge of 4883 teachers of all education levels over recent school years and found that they needed further training to advance new learning models for the digital age. These programs were proposed using the joint framework. INTEF (National Institute of Educational Technologies and Teacher Training), as a reference.

In Europe, the Digital Competence of Educators (DigCompEdu), developed a framework to address and promote the development of digital literacy. It is divided into six branches: professional engagement, digital sources resources, teaching and learning, assessment, empowerment of learners, & the facilitation of learners’ digital competence. The European Commission also developed the "Digital Education Action Plan", which focuses on using the COVID-19 pandemic experience to learn how technology is being used on a large scale for education, and adapting the systems used for leaning and training in the digital age. The framework is divided into two main strategic priorities: fostering the development of a high-performing digital education ecosystem, and enhancing digital skills and competencies for digital transformation.

