ElevenLabs is primarily known for its browser-based, AI-assisted text-to-speech software, Speech Synthesis, which can produce lifelike speech by synthesizing vocal emotion and Intonation (linguistics)|intonation. The company states its software is built to adjust the intonation and pacing of delivery based on the context of language input used. It uses advanced algorithms to analyze the contextual aspects of text, aiming to detect emotions like anger, sadness, happiness, or alarm, which enables the system to understand the user's sentiment, resulting in achieving a more realistic and human-like inflection. The startup is in the process of patenting this technology.

Voice Library is the company's feature for sharing unique voice profiles created using their Voice Design technology. These pre-designed voice profiles allow users to select a voice that best suits their needs, rather than creating one from scratch. Another tool called VoiceLab allows users to clone voices from just a few short snippets of audio and can create entirely new synthetic voices.

In July 2023, ElevenLabs announced "Projects", a tool for creating long-form spoken content such as audiobooks and dialogue segments with contextually-aware synthetic or custom voices. The tool was released in September. In August, ElevenLabs expanded its voice generation capabilities to 28 languages. Using an in-house AI model, it automatically detects languages like Korean language|Korean, Dutch language|Dutch, and Vietnamese language|Vietnamese, allowing for "emotionally rich" multilingual speech generation. The company also announced that its technology had officially exited its Software release life cycle|beta phase.

In October 2023, ElevenLabs presented "AI Dubbing," a tool that is able to translate speech into more than 20 languages. The feature is capable of preserving the speaker's original voice, emotions, and intonation, by employing proprietary methods to handle tasks like noise removal, speaker differentiation, transcription, and synchronization of translated speech with the original audio.

