Yudkowsky's views on the safety challenges future generations of AI systems pose are discussed in Stuart J. Russell|Stuart Russell's and Peter Norvig's undergraduate textbook ''Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach''. Noting the difficulty of formally specifying general-purpose goals by hand, Russell and Norvig cite Yudkowsky's proposal that autonomous and adaptive systems be designed to learn correct behavior over time:

{{quote|text=Yudkowsky (2008) goes into more detail about how to design a ''Friendly AI''. He asserts that friendliness (a desire not to harm humans) should be designed in from the start, but that the designers should recognize both that their own designs may be flawed, and that the robot will learn and evolve over time. Thus the challenge is one of mechanism design—to design a mechanism for evolving AI under a system of checks and balances, and to give the systems utility functions that will remain friendly in the face of such changes.
File:Eliezer debating destiny manifest.jpg|left|thumb|319x319px|Eliezer debating [[Destiny (streamer)|Destiny at Manifest 2023]]
In ''Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach'', Russell and Norvig raise the objection that there are known limits to intelligent problem-solving from computational complexity theory; if there are strong limits on how efficiently algorithms can solve various tasks, an intelligence explosion may not be possible. or even "destroy[ing] a rogue datacenter by airstrike". ''Overcoming Bias'' has since functioned as Hanson's personal blog.

Over 300 blog posts by Yudkowsky on philosophy and science (originally written on ''LessWrong'' and ''Overcoming Bias'') were released as an ebook, ''Rationality: From AI to Zombies'', by MIRI in 2015. MIRI has also published ''Inadequate Equilibria'', Yudkowsky's 2017 ebook on societal inefficiencies.

Yudkowsky has also written several works of fiction. His fan fiction|fanfiction novel ''Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality'' uses plot elements from J. K. Rowling|J. K. Rowling's ''Harry Potter'' series to illustrate topics in science. ''The New Yorker'' described ''Harry Potter and the Methods of Rationality'' as a retelling of Rowling's original "in an attempt to explain Harry's wizardry through the scientific method".

