The movie ''The Thirteenth Floor'' suggests a future where simulated reality|simulated worlds with sentient inhabitants are created by computer game consoles for the purpose of entertainment. The movie ''The Matrix'' suggests a future where the dominant species on planet Earth are sentient machines and humanity is treated with utmost speciesism. The short story "The Planck Dive" suggests a future where humanity has turned itself into software that can be duplicated and optimized and the relevant distinction between types of software is sentient and non-sentient. The same idea can be found in the Emergency Medical Hologram of ''USS Voyager (NCC-74656)|Starship Voyager'', which is an apparently sentient copy of a reduced subset of the consciousness of its creator, Lewis Zimmerman|Dr. Zimmerman, who, for the best motives, has created the system to give medical assistance in case of emergencies. The movies ''Bicentennial Man (film)|Bicentennial Man'' and ''A.I. Artificial Intelligence|A.I.'' deal with the possibility of sentient robots that could love. ''I, Robot (film)|I, Robot'' explored some aspects of Asimov's three laws. All these scenarios try to foresee possibly unethical consequences of the creation of sentient computers.

The ethics of artificial intelligence is one of several core themes in BioWare's Mass Effect series of games. It explores the scenario of a civilization accidentally creating AI through a rapid increase in computational power through a global scale neural network. This event caused an ethical schism between those who felt bestowing organic rights upon the newly sentient Geth was appropriate and those who continued to see them as disposable machinery and fought to destroy them. Beyond the initial conflict, the complexity of the relationship between the machines and their creators is another ongoing theme throughout the story.

''Detroit: Become Human'' is one of the most famous video games which discusses the ethics of artificial intelligence recently. Quantic Dream designed the chapters of the game using interactive storylines to give players a more immersive gaming experience. Players manipulate three different awakened bionic people in the face of different events to make different choices to achieve the purpose of changing the human view of the bionic group and different choices will result in different endings. This is one of the few games that puts players in the bionic perspective, which allows them to better consider the rights and interests of robots once a true artificial intelligence is created.

Over time, debates have tended to focus less and less on ''possibility'' and more on ''desirability'', as emphasized in the Hugo de Garis#The Artilect War|"Cosmist" and "Terran" debates initiated by Hugo de Garis and Kevin Warwick. A Cosmist, according to Hugo de Garis, is actually seeking to build more intelligent successors to the human species.

Experts at the University of Cambridge have argued that AI is portrayed in fiction and nonfiction overwhelmingly as racially White, in ways that distort perceptions of its risks and benefits.

