While the anticipation of a future dominated by potentially indomitable technology has fueled the imagination of writers and film makers for a long time, one question has been less frequently analyzed, namely, to what extent fiction has played a role in providing inspiration for technological development. It has been documented, for instance, that the young Alan Turing saw and appreciated aforementioned Shaw's play ''Back to Methuselah'' in 1933 (just 3 years before the publication of his first seminal paper, which laid the groundwork for the digital computer), and he would likely have been at least aware of plays like ''R.U.R.'', which was an international success and translated into many languages.

One might also ask the question which role science fiction played in establishing the tenets and ethical implications of AI development: Isaac Asimov conceptualized his Three Laws of Robotics in the 1942 short story  "Runaround (story)|Runaround", part of the short story collection  ''I, Robot''; Arthur C. Clarke's short ''The Sentinel (short story)|The Sentinel'', on which Stanley Kubrick's film ''2001: A Space Odyssey (film)|2001: A Space Odyssey'' is based, was written in 1948 and published in 1952. Another example (among many others) would be Philip K. Dick's numerous short stories and novels – in particular ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?'', published in 1968, and featuring its own version of a Turing Test, the Blade Runner#Voight-Kampff machine|''Voight-Kampff Test'', to gauge emotional responses of androids indistinguishable from humans. The novel later became the basis of the influential 1982 movie ''Blade Runner'' by Ridley Scott.

Science fiction has been grappling with ethical implications of AI developments for decades, and thus provided a blueprint for ethical issues that might emerge once something akin to general artificial intelligence has been achieved: Spike Jonze's 2013 film Her (film)|''Her'' shows what can happen if a user falls in love with the seductive voice of his smartphone operating system; Ex Machina (film)|''Ex Machina'', on the other hand, asks a more difficult question: if confronted with a clearly recognizable machine, made only human by a face and an empathetic and sensual voice, would we still be able to establish an emotional connection, still be seduced by it?  (The film echoes a theme already present two centuries earlier, in the 1817 short story ''The Sandman (short story)|The Sandmann'' by E. T. A. Hoffmann.)

The theme of coexistence with artificial sentient beings is also the theme of two recent novels: ''Machines Like Me'' by Ian McEwan, published in 2019, involves, among many other things, a love-triangle involving an artificial person as well as a human couple. ''Klara and the Sun'' by Nobel Prize in Literature|Nobel Prize winner Kazuo Ishiguro, published in 2021, is the first-person account of Klara, an 'AF' (artificial friend), who is trying, in her own way, to help the girl she is living with, who, after having been 'lifted' (i.e. having been subjected to genetic enhancements), is suffering from a strange illness.

