Rotten Tomatoes prose|92|8.2|289|''Ex Machina'' leans heavier on ideas than effects, but it's still a visually polished piece of work—and an uncommonly engaging sci-fi feature.|ref=yes|access-date=29 May 2023}} 

The magazine ''New Scientist'' in a multi-page review said, "It is a rare thing to see a movie about science that takes no prisoners intellectually ... [it] is a stylish, spare and cerebral psycho-techno thriller, which gives a much needed shot in the arm for smart science fiction". The review suggested that the theme was whether "Ava makes a conscious person feel that the Ava is conscious". An AI commentator, Azeem, has noted that although the film seemed to be about a robot who wanted to be human, it was actually a pessimistic story along the lines of Nick Bostrom's warning of how difficult it will be to successfully control a strategising artificial intelligence or know what it would do if free.

''The New York Times'' critic Manohla Dargis gave the film a 'Critic's Pick', calling it "a smart, sleek movie about men and the machines they make". Kenneth Turan of the ''Los Angeles Times'' recommended the film, stating: "Shrewdly imagined and persuasively made, 'Ex Machina' is a spooky piece of speculative fiction that's completely plausible, capable of both thinking big thoughts and providing pulp thrills." Steven Rea, ''The Philadelphia Inquirer'' film critic, gave the film four out of four, writing: "Like stage actors who live and breathe their roles over the course of months, Isaac, Gleeson, and Vikander excel, and cast a spell."

''IGN'' reviewer Chris Tilly gave the film a nine out of ten 'Amazing' score, saying "Anchored by three dazzling central performances, it's a stunning directorial debut from Alex Garland that's essential viewing for anyone with even a passing interest in where technology is taking us."

Mike Scott, writing for the ''New Orleans Times-Picayune'', said, "It's a theme Mary Shelley brought us in ''Frankenstein'', which was first published in 1818... And while ''Ex Machina'' replaces the stitches and neck bolts with gears and fiber-optics, it all feels an awful lot like the same story". Jaime Perales Contreras, writing for ''Letras Libres'', compared ''Ex Machina'' as a gothic experience similar to a modern version of ''Frankenstein'', saying "both the novel ''Frankenstein'' and the movie ''Ex Machina'' share the history of a fallible god in a continuous battle against his creation". Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of ''The A.V. Club'' criticised the way the science fiction, near the end, veered off course from being a "film of ideas" by "taking an arbitrary left turn into the territory of corny slasher thrillers": "While ''Ex Machina''s ending isn't unmotivated [...], it does fracture much of what's special about the movie. Up until the final scenes, Garland creates and sustains a credible atmosphere of unease and scientific speculation, defined by color-coded production design [...] and a tiny, capable cast". Steve Dalton from ''The Hollywood Reporter'' stated, "The story ends in a muddled rush, leaving many unanswered questions. Like a newly launched high-end smartphone, ''Ex Machina'' looks cool and sleek, but ultimately proves flimsy and underpowered. Still, for dystopian future-shock fans who can look beyond its basic design flaws, Garland's feature debut functions just fine as superior pulp sci-fi."

The Writers Guild Foundation listed the screenplay as one of the best in 2010s film and television, with one writer singling out the scene in which Caleb and Nathan discuss the model after Ava as "a great illustration of getting your reader/audience to care about what happens next."

