Main|Search for extraterrestrial intelligence}}

There has been a search for signals from extraterrestrial intelligence for several decades, with no significant results. Active SETI (Active Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence) is the attempt to send messages to intelligent extraterrestrial life. Active SETI messages are usually sent in the form of radio signals. Physical messages like that of the Pioneer plaque may also be considered an active SETI message.

Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence (CETI) is a branch of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence that focuses on composing and deciphering messages that could theoretically be understood by another technological civilization. The best-known CETI experiment was the 1974 Arecibo message composed by Frank Drake and Carl Sagan. There are multiple independent organizations and individuals engaged in CETI research.

The U.S. government's position is that "chances of contact with an extraterrestrial intelligence are extremely small, given the distances involved." This line of thinking has led some to conclude that first contact will most likely be made with extraterrestrial artificial intelligence, rather than with biological beings.

The Wow! signal remains the best candidate for an extraterrestrial radio signal ever detected.

On 14 June 2022, astronomers, working with China's Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical Telescope|FAST telescope, reported the possibility of having detected artificial (presumably alien) signals, but cautions that further studies are required to determine if some kind of natural radio interference may be the source. More recently, on 18 June 2022, Dan Werthimer, chief scientist for several SETI-related projects, reportedly noted, “These signals are from radio interference; they are due to radio pollution from earthlings, not from E.T.”.

On 26 Jul 2023, House lawmakers held a hearing Wednesday to examine how the executive branch handles reports of unidentified anomalous phenomena, also known as UAPs or UFOs. The House Oversight's national security subcommittee heard from three witnesses, including a former Navy commanding officer, with firsthand knowledge of how the government has handled reports of UFO sightings.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNgoul4vyDM

