In fault detection and diagnosis, Statistical classification|mathematical classification models which in fact belong to supervised learning methods, are trained on the training set of a labeled dataset to accurately identify the redundancies, faults and anomalous samples. During the past decades, there are different Statistical classification|classification and Data pre-processing|preprocessing models that have been developed and proposed in this research area. k-nearest neighbors algorithm|''K''-nearest-neighbors algorithm (''k''NN) is one of the oldest techniques which has been used to solve fault detection and diagnosis problems. Despite the simple logic that this instance-based algorithm has, there are some problems with large dimensionality and processing time when it is used on large datasets. Since k-nearest neighbors algorithm|''k''NN is not able to automatically extract the features to overcome the curse of dimensionality, so often some Data pre-processing|data preprocessing techniques like Principal component analysis(PCA), Linear discriminant analysis(LDA) or Canonical correlation|Canonical correlation analysis(CCA) accompany it to reach a better performance. In many industrial cases, the effectiveness of k-nearest neighbors algorithm|''k''NN has been compared with other methods, specially with more complex classification models such as Support Vector Machines (SVMs), which is widely used in this field. Thanks to their appropriate nonlinear mapping using kernel methods, SVMs have an impressive performance in generalization, even with small training data. However, general SVMs do not have automatic feature extraction themselves and just like k-nearest neighbors algorithm|''k''NN, are often coupled with a data pre-processing technique. Another drawback of SVMs is that their performance is highly sensitive to the initial parameters, particularly to the kernel methods, so in each signal dataset, a parameter tuning process is required to be conducted first. Therefore, the low speed of the training phase is a limitation of SVMs when it comes to its usage in fault detection and diagnosis cases.
File:Time domain waveform and CWTS of a normal signal comparison.png|thumb|Time domain waveform (top) and CWTS (bottom) of a normal signal
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are among the most mature and widely used Statistical classification|mathematical classification algorithms in fault detection and diagnosis. ANNs are well-known for their efficient self-learning capabilities of the complex relations (which generally exist inherently in fault detection and diagnosis problems) and are easy to operate. However, ANNs tend to overfitting|over-fit the training set, which will have consequences of having poor validation accuracy on the validation set. Hence, often, some regularization terms and prior knowledge are added to the ANN model to avoid overfitting|over-fitting and achieve higher performance. Moreover, properly determining the size of the hidden layer needs an exhaustive parameter tuning, to avoid poor approximation and generalization capabilities. machinery parts (i.e. mechanical bearings), compressors, wind turbine|wind and gas turbines and steel plates.

