O'Connor made her film debut in Emma-Kate Croghan's critically acclaimed independent romantic comedy ''Love and Other Catastrophes'' (1996). She received her first AACTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role nomination for her performance in the film. In 1997, she had the leading role in ''Kiss or Kill (1997 film)|Kiss or Kill'', and starred opposite Cate Blanchett and Richard Roxburgh in ''Thank God He Met Lizzie''. The following year, O'Connor earned a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance as Emma Bovary in the film ''Madame Bovary (2000 film)|Madame Bovary''.

In 2000, O'Connor began her Hollywood career with a role in Bedazzled (2000 film)|the remake with Brendan Fraser and Elizabeth Hurley of the 1967 British film ''Bedazzled (1967 film)''. The following year, she had a leading role in the Steven Spielberg science fiction drama ''A.I. Artificial Intelligence'', earning her a nomination for a Saturn Award for Best Actress. In 2002, she starred alongside Rupert Everett, Colin Firth and Judi Dench in the romantic comedy-drama ''The Importance of Being Earnest (2002 film)|The Importance of Being Earnest'', directed by Oliver Parker and based on Oscar Wilde's The Importance of Being Earnest|classic play. In 2003, O'Connor starred opposite Paul Walker in the science fiction film ''Timeline (2003 film)|Timeline'', which bombed at the box office.

In 2004, O'Connor returned to independent films and starred in ''Book of Love (2004 film)|Book of Love'' opposite Simon Baker, and ''Iron Jawed Angels'' with Hilary Swank, Julia Ormond and Anjelica Huston. In 2008, she starred in the short-lived American Broadcasting Company|ABC comedy-drama series ''Cashmere Mafia'' alongside Lucy Liu, Miranda Otto and Bonnie Somerville. From 2013 to 2014, she starred as Rose Selfridge in the British period drama ''Mr Selfridge''.

In 2014, O'Connor was cast as the lead in the British drama ''The Missing (British TV series)|The Missing''. She was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film for her performance in the series. She then appeared as Belle's mother Colette in the fourth season of the American series ''Once Upon a Time (TV series)|Once Upon a Time''. In 2016, O'Connor co-starred in the horror film ''The Conjuring 2'', alongside Vera Farmiga and Patrick Wilson, and in ''Cleverman'', opposite Iain Glen.

In 2022, O'Connor made her directorial debut with ''Emily (2022 film)|Emily'', a biographical drama she also wrote, about the life of English writer Emily Brontë (portrayed by Emma Mackey).

