As of 2019, Group 42 was reportedly the sole registered shareholder of ToTok (app)|ToTok, the free messaging, video, and voice-calling mobile application. The application was downloaded by users in the Middle East, Asia, Europe, North America, and Africa, within several months. The application was accused of being "used by the government of the United Arab Emirates to try to track every conversation, movement, relationship, appointment, sound and image of those who install it," in a ''The New York Times|New York Times'' exposé in December 2019. Following the allegations, the application was removed by Apple Inc.|Apple and Google from their application stores. the CEO of G42 has been leading Pegasus (spyware)|Pegasus – a subsidiary of DarkMatter (company)|DarkMatter, an Emirati security firm, which received scrutiny over the hiring of former Central Intelligence Agency|CIA and National Security Agency|NSA officials to spy on Americans, dissidents, and political rivals. The company denied having any connection with DarkMatter.

In December 2019, Group 42 announced signing an agreement of strategic partnership with Abu Dhabi Developmental Holding Company (ADDH) to establish a joint venture called Adalytyx.

In 2020, G42 was reported to have donated BGI Groups Chinese-made Covid testing kits to Nevada. US intelligence and security officials objected to these testing kits, raising concerns over privacy risks, in that the gene-sequencing machines of the BGI Group could misuse the patients’ DNA. As of 2020, G42 was also reportedly working with BGI on a project for collecting genetic data of UAE citizens to "generate the highest quality, most comprehensive genome data".

In June 2020, G42 partnered with Sinopharm (company)|Sinopharm for clinical trials of a COVID-19 vaccine and in March 2021, they decided to produce the vaccine in Abu Dhabi.

On 2 July 2020, G42 announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the two Israeli defense groups, Rafael Advanced Defense Systems and Israel Aerospace Industries to research and develop methods to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. The Israeli defense firms’ subsidiary Elta confirmed the agreement.

In July 2023, G42 agreed to pay around $100&nbsp;million to purchase the first of potentially nine supercomputers from Cerebras to deploy its AI technology to create chatbots and analyze genomic and preventive care data. Each supercomputer is capable of 4&nbsp;FLOPS|exaflops of computing.

On October 18, 2023, a partnership was announced with OpenAI, the AI research and deployment company responsible for ChatGPT. Follow the report by ''The New York Times'', Peng Xiao stated that G42 would phase out its use of Huawei equipment.

