File:JohnvonNeumann-LosAlamos.gif|thumb|upright|[[John von Neumann]]
Game theory emerged as a unique field when John von Neumann published the paper ''On the Theory of Games of Strategy'' in 1928. Von Neumann's original proof used Brouwer's fixed-point theorem on continuous Map (mathematics)|mappings into compact convex sets, which became a standard method in game theory and mathematical economics. Von Neumann's work in game theory culminated in his 1944 book ''Theory of Games and Economic Behavior'', co-authored with Oskar Morgenstern. The second edition of this book provided an axiomatic set theory|axiomatic theory of utility, which reincarnated Daniel Bernoulli|Daniel Bernoulli's old theory of utility (of money) as an independent discipline. This foundational work contains the method for finding mutually consistent solutions for two-person zero-sum games. Subsequent work focused primarily on Cooperative game theory|cooperative game theory, which analyzes optimal strategies for groups of individuals, presuming that they can enforce agreements between them about proper strategies.
File:John f nash 20061102 3.jpg|thumb|upright|[[John Forbes Nash Jr.|John Nash]]
In 1950, the first mathematical discussion of the prisoner's dilemma appeared, and an experiment was undertaken by notable mathematicians Merrill M. Flood and Melvin Dresher, as part of the RAND Corporation's investigations into game theory. RAND pursued the studies because of possible applications to global nuclear strategy. Around this same time, John Forbes Nash|John Nash developed a criterion for mutual consistency of players' strategies known as the Nash equilibrium, applicable to a wider variety of games than the criterion proposed by von Neumann and Morgenstern. Nash proved that every finite n-player, non-zero-sum (not just two-player zero-sum) non-cooperative game has what is now known as a Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies.

Game theory experienced a flurry of activity in the 1950s, during which the concepts of the core (economics)|core, the extensive form game, fictitious play, repeated games, and the Shapley value were developed. The 1950s also saw the first applications of game theory to philosophy and political science.

