Discussions on the mathematics of games began long before the rise of modern mathematical game theory. Gerolamo Cardano|Cardano's work ''Liber de ludo aleae'' (''Book on Games of Chance''), which was written around 1564 but published posthumously in 1663, sketches some basic ideas on games of chance. In the 1650s, Blaise Pascal|Pascal and Christiaan Huygens|Huygens developed the concept of Expected value|expectation on reasoning about the structure of games of chance. Pascal argued for equal division when chances are equal while Huygens extended the argument by considering strategies for a player who can make any bet with any opponent so long as its terms are equal. Huygens later published his gambling calculus as ''De ratiociniis in ludo aleæ'' (''On Reasoning in Games of Chance'') in 1657.

In 1713, a letter attributed to Charles Waldegrave, an active Jacobitism|Jacobite and uncle to British diplomat James Waldegrave, 1st Earl Waldegrave|James Waldegrave, analyzed a game called "le Her". Waldegrave provided a minimax mixed strategy solution to a two-person version of the card game, and the problem is now known as Waldegrave problem. In 1838, Antoine Augustin Cournot considered a duopoly and presented a solution that is the Nash equilibrium of the game in his  (''Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth'').

In 1913, Ernst Zermelo published  (''On an Application of Set Theory to the Theory of the Game of Chess''), which proved that the optimal chess strategy is Strictly determined game|strictly determined. This paved the way for more general theorems.

In 1938, the Danish mathematical economist Frederik Zeuthen proved that the mathematical model had a winning strategy by using Brouwer fixed point theorem|Brouwer's fixed point theorem. In his 1938 book  and earlier notes, Émile Borel proved a minimax theorem for two-person zero-sum matrix games only when the pay-off matrix is symmetric and provided a solution to a non-trivial infinite game (known in English as Blotto game). Borel conjectured the non-existence of mixed-strategy equilibria in Finite Game|finite two-person zero-sum games, a conjecture that was proved false by von Neumann.

