Genpact was founded in 1997 as a unit of General Electric. The company was founded as GE Capital International Services (GECIS) in New Delhi. Starting with 20 employees under the leadership of CEO Pramod Bhasin, its charter was to provide business process outsourcing solutions to GE's businesses. In the beginning, GECIS created processes for outsourcing back-office activities for GE Capital such as processing car loans and credit card transactions. It was an Business process outsourcing to India#General Electric|experimental concept at the time and the beginning of the Business process outsourcing (BPO)|Business-Process-Outsourcing (BPO) industry.

One year after its launch, GECIS employed about 800 people and generated revenues of US$4 million. By 2001, GECIS operations had grown to 12,000 employees and the company began to manage a wide range of processes across GE's financial services and manufacturing businesses.

By 2004, GECIS oversaw around 700 business processes for GE that had migrated from the US to India, generating revenues of US$426 million. As part of this transition, the company changed its name to Genpact for “generating business impact.” Also in 2005, the company opened additional offices in India and by the end of the year, recorded US$493 million in revenue, with 15% coming from new global clients, and the remaining 85% from GE.

In August 2007, Genpact was listed on the NYSE under the symbol 'G'. The company continued to grow, opening offices in six additional countries that same year and launching a joint venture with the Indian company NDTV to offer outsourcing services for the media industry. In 2008, the company crossed US$1 billion in revenue, with 53% coming from clients other than GE. He was succeeded on 17 June 2011 by NV "Tiger”" Tyagarajan, who was appointed to the Board of Directors and became Genpact's new CEO. Tyagarajan was previously CEO of Genpact from 1999 to 2002, when he led the business through a critical growth phase as a subsidiary of GE. When Genpact became an independent company, he rejoined the firm from GE Capital U.S. as executive vice president of sales and business development from 2005 to 2009. Thereafter, he took on the role of the firm's chief operating officer, before being named CEO in 2011.

Bain Capital became the firm's largest shareholder in October 2012.

In February 2019, Genpact Independent contractor|contractors in Hyderabad who were assigned content moderation tasks for Facebook reportedly experienced psychological trauma while evaluating videos depicting suicide, torture, terrorism, and pornography.

