glossary}}




 which solves the search problem, namely, to retrieve information stored within some data structure, or calculated in the Feasible region|search space of a domain (software engineering)|problem domain, either with Continuous or discrete variable|discrete or continuous values.}}


 in which individual genomes are chosen from a population for later breeding (using the Crossover (genetic algorithm)|crossover operator).}}










 and .}}





. It does so by evaluating the meaning of programming language syntax|syntactically valid String (computer science)|strings defined by a specific programming language, showing the computation involved. In such a case that the evaluation would be of syntactically invalid strings, the result would be non-computation. Semantics describes the processes a computer follows when executing a program in that specific language. This can be shown by describing the relationship between the input and output of a program, or an explanation of how the program will be executed on a certain computer platform|platform, hence creating a model of computation.}}








 in artificial intelligence. It is closely related to regression (machine learning)|regression and classification in machine learning|classification, but the goal is to learn from a similarity function that measures how similar or related two objects are. It has applications in ranking, in recommender system|recommendation systems, visual identity tracking, face verification, and speaker verification.}}






























 that more closely mimics a natural neural network. In addition to Artificial neuron|neuronal and Electrical synapse|synaptic state, SNNs incorporate the concept of time into their Operating Model.}}





 and statistics, classification is the problem of identifying to which of a set of categorical data|categories (sub-populations) a new observation belongs, on the basis of a training set of data containing observations (or instances) whose category membership is known.  Examples are assigning a given email to the Spam filtering|"spam" or "non-spam" class, and assigning a diagnosis to a given patient based on observed characteristics of the patient (sex, blood pressure, presence or absence of certain symptoms, etc.).  Classification is an example of pattern recognition.}}


 that is concerned with domain models that exhibit both uncertainty (which can be dealt with using statistical methods) and complex, relation (mathematics)|relational structure. Note that SRL is sometimes called Relational Machine Learning (RML) in the literature. Typically, the knowledge representation formalisms developed in SRL use (a subset of) first-order logic to describe relational properties of a domain in a general manner (universal quantification) and draw upon probabilistic graphical models (such as Bayesian networks or Markov networks) to model the uncertainty; some also build upon the methods of inductive logic programming.}}














 that possesses intelligence far surpassing that of the genius|brightest and most intellectual giftedness|gifted human minds. Superintelligence may also refer to a property of problem-solving systems (e.g., superintelligent language translators or engineering assistants) whether or not these high-level intellectual competencies are embodied in agents that act within the physical world. A superintelligence may or may not be created by an  and be associated with a .}}


 task of learning a function that maps an input to an output based on example input-output pairs. It infers a function from '''' consisting of a set of ''training examples''.  In supervised learning, each example is a ''pair'' consisting of an input object (typically a vector) and a desired output value (also called the ''supervisory signal'').  A supervised learning algorithm analyzes the training data and produces an inferred function, which can be used for mapping new examples. An optimal scenario will allow for the algorithm to correctly determine the class labels for unseen instances. This requires the learning algorithm to generalize from the training data to unseen situations in a "reasonable" way (see inductive bias).}}


, support-vector machines (SVMs, also support-vector networks) are supervised learning models with associated learning  that analyze data used for Statistical classification|classification and regression analysis.}}





 research that are based on high-level "symbolic" (human-readable) representations of problems, Formal logic|logic, and .}}


 which emphasizes that the intelligence of machines need not be an imitation or in any way artificial; it can be a genuine form of intelligence.}}







