Visiting a store at age four, Osment signed up with a talent scout. Called back for an audition, he was asked to describe the biggest thing he had ever seen; his description of an IMAX theater screen helped win him a part in a Pizza Hut TV commercial. His first feature film role was as Forrest Gump (character)|Forrest Gump's son in the 1994 film ''Forrest Gump''. He also had a small part in another 1994 film, ''Mixed Nuts''. Throughout the rest of the 1990s, Osment played regular or recurring roles in various TV series; including ''The Jeff Foxworthy Show'' and the final season of ''Murphy Brown'', where he replaced Dyllan Christopher as Murphy's son, Avery.

File:Haley Joel Osment in 2001.jpg|thumb|Osment in 2001
In addition, he made numerous guest appearances on shows, including ''The Larry Sanders Show'', ''Walker, Texas Ranger'', ''Touched by an Angel'', ''Chicago Hope'', ''The Pretender (TV series)|The Pretender'', and ''Ally McBeal''. He appeared in the 1996 film ''Bogus (1996 film)|Bogus'', alongside Whoopi Goldberg and Gérard Depardieu and the 1998 television film ''The Lake (1998 film)|The Lake'', as well as ''I'll Remember April (1999 film)|I'll Remember April'' (1999), with future ''The Sixth Sense'' co-star Trevor Morgan (actor)|Trevor Morgan.

Osment first achieved stardom in 1999, when he appeared in ''The Sixth Sense'', co-starring Bruce Willis. For his portrayal of Cole Sear, a psychic child, Osment won the Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor. He was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, becoming the second-youngest performer ever to receive an academy nomination for a supporting role, but lost the final Oscar vote to Michael Caine (with whom he would later work, appearing together in ''Secondhand Lions''). One of Osment's lines in ''The Sixth Sense'', "I see dead people," became a popular catchphrase and is often repeated or parodied on television programs and in other media. The phrase is #44 on the American Film Institute's list of AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes|100 Movie Quotes. He made three minor appearances on the animated TV series ''Family Guy'' in 2000 and 2001.

In 2000 Osment had a leading role in ''Pay It Forward (film)|Pay It Forward'', which received mixed reviews. The following year, he appeared in Steven Spielberg's ''A.I. Artificial Intelligence'', cementing his stature as one of the leading young actors in Hollywood. This role earned him his second Saturn Award|Saturn Award for Best Younger Actor, and further critical acclaim. In reviewing the film, critic Roger Ebert claimed that: "Osment, who is onscreen in almost every scene, is one of the best actors now working". In 2001, Osment starred in the Polish film, ''Edges of the Lord'', as Romek. The film was never released theatrically in the United States. Between 2002 and 2003, Osment lent his voice to films such as ''The Country Bears'', ''The Hunchback of Notre Dame II'' and ''The Jungle Book 2'', all from Walt Disney Pictures. He returned to live action with the 2003 in film|2003 film, ''Secondhand Lions''.

Osment lent his voice to the video game series ''Kingdom Hearts'', providing the voice of Sora (Kingdom Hearts)|Sora, the series' main character, and also Vanitas (Kingdom Hearts)|Vanitas, a villain from the same series. Osment also voiced the character of List of Immortal Grand Prix characters#Takeshi Jin|Takeshi Jin in the English version of the ''Immortal Grand Prix'' anime television series.

He appeared in ''Home of the Giants'', playing a high school journalist opposite Ryan Merriman and Danielle Panabaker. He subsequently worked on ''Montana Amazon'' as both an actor and executive producer. The film starred Olympia Dukakis and debuted at the Orlando Film Festival|Orlando and Big Apple Film Festivals in November 2010, winning Best Feature Film at the latter.

Osment made his Broadway theatre|Broadway debut at the Belasco Theatre in November 2008 playing the role of Bobby, a young heroin addict, in a revival of David Mamet's ''American Buffalo (play)|American Buffalo''; co-starring with John Leguizamo and Cedric the Entertainer. The show opened to mixed reviews, and a provisional statement was made on November 20, 2008, that it would close after the first week.

In 2010, Osment signed for a leading role in the comedy film ''Sex Ed (film)|Sex Ed'' from Motion Picture Corporation of America|MPCA, to play a college graduate who wants to teach geometry, but ends up as a Sex education in the United States|sex education teacher while inexperienced himself. In January 2011, ''Entertainment Weekly'' reported that Osment had joined the cast of ''Sassy Pants'', a comedy about a homeschooler with an overbearing mother.

''Variety'' reported on June 27, 2011, that Osment would star in ''Wake the Dead'', a modern-day retelling of the Frankenstein story, with production to begin the last quarter of 2011. As of mid-2014, no published status was available.

In 2013, he appeared in a series of episodes of Amazon's ''Alpha House''. He also co-starred in the Will Ferrell and Adam McKay-produced comedy melodrama miniseries ''The Spoils of Babylon'' and ''The Spoils Before Dying'' for IFC (American TV channel)|IFC. Kevin Smith has further added to Osment's career resurgence with roles in the first two films of his True North Trilogy, first as Teddy Craft in ''Tusk (2014 film)|Tusk'' and next as a fictionalized version of Canadian journalist Adrien Arcand in ''Yoga Hosers''.

In 2017, Osment held a recurring role in season 4 of HBO's ''Silicon Valley (TV series)|Silicon Valley'' as VR expert and tech financier Keenan Feldspar. Also in 2017, Osment made an appearance on BBC America's ''Top Gear America'' as one of the guests in the fourth episode of season 1.

In 2019, Osment had a supporting role in the Netflix film ''Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile'', starring alongside Lily Collins whose character Liz follows the prosecution of Ted Bundy, played by Zac Efron. Osment performs in two series that have Seth Rogen and Evan Goldberg as executive producers: Osment plays Mesmer in the Amazon series ''The Boys (TV series)|The Boys'' and Dr. Stu Camillo in the Hulu series ''Future Man (TV series)|Future Man''.

