Medical technology has evolved into smaller portable devices, for instance, smartphones, touchscreens, tablets, laptops, Electronic paper|digital ink, voice and Facial recognition system|face recognition and more. With this technology, innovations like Electronic health record|electronic health records (EHR), health information exchange (HIE), Nationwide Health Information Network|Nationwide Health Information Network (NwHIN), Personal health record|personal health records (PHRs), patient portals, nanomedicine, genome-based personalized medicine, Global Positioning System|Geographical Positioning System (GPS), radio frequency identification (RFID), telemedicine, clinical decision support (CDS), mobile home health care and cloud computing came to exist.

Medical imaging and Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have been long used and proven Medical Technologies for medical research, patient reviewing, and treatment analyzing. With the advancement of imagining technologies, including the use of faster and more data, higher resolution images, and specialist automation software, the capabilities of medical imaging technology are growing and yielding better results. As the imaging hardware and software evolve this means that patients will need to use less contrasting agents, and also spend less time and money.

Further advancement in healthcare is electromagnetic (EM) technology guidance systems, used in medical procedures, allowing real-time visualization and navigation for the placement of medical devices inside the human body. For example, a neuro-navigated catheter is inserted into the brain, or a feeding tube placement in the stomach or small intestine, as demonstrated by the ENvue System. ENvue is an advanced electromagnetic navigation system for enteral feeding tube placement. The system uses a field generator and several EM sensors enabling proper scaling of the display to the patient’s body contour, and real-time view of the feeding tube tip location and direction, which helps the medical staff ensure correct placement and avoid placement of the tube in the lungs. 

3D printing is another major development in healthcare. It can be used to produce specialized Splint (medicine)|splints, Prosthesis|prostheses, parts for medical devices and inert implants. The end goal of 3D printing is being able to print out customized replaceable body parts. In the following section, it will explain more about 3D printing in healthcare. New types of technologies also include artificial intelligence and robots.

