File:Fort Belvoir Community Hospital astounds with groundbreaking technology and devotion to patient care 120530-A-AJ780-011.jpg|alt=Health Technology in Future|thumb|Fort Belvoir Community Hospital astounds with groundbreaking technology and devotion to patient care
The practice of medicine in the United States is currently in a major transition. This transition is due to many factors, but primarily because of the implementation and integration of health technologies into healthcare. In recent years, the widespread adoption of electronic health records (EHR) has caused a big impact on healthcare. "The Digital Doctor: Hope, Hype, and Harm at the Dawn of Medicine's Computer Age," by Robert Wachter, aims to inform readers about this transition. Dr. Wachter has reviewed and made points about the future of health technologies in the book. He states that there will be fewer hospitals in the future. Due to the advancement of technologies, people will be more likely to go to hospitals for major surgeries or critical illness. In the future, nurse call buttons will not be needed in hospitals. Instead, robots will deliver medication, take care of patients, and administer the system. In the future, the electronic health record will look different. Healthcare providers will be able to enter the notes via speech-to-text transcriptions in real-time. Recent advances in medical technology have also focused on cost reduction. Medical technology may broadly include medical devices, information technology, biotechnology|biotech, and healthcare services.

The impacts of medical technology involve social and ethical issues. For example, physicians can seek objective information from technology rather than read subjective patient reports.

A major driver of the sector's growth is the consumerization of Medtech. Supported by the widespread availability of smartphones and tablets, providers can reach a large audience at low cost, a trend that stands to be consolidated as wearable technologies spread throughout the market.

In the years 2010–2015, venture funding has grown&nbsp;200%, allowing US$11.7 billion to flow into health tech businesses from&nbsp;over 30,000&nbsp;investors in the space.

