As part of an ongoing trend towards consumer-driven healthcare, websites or apps which provide more information on health care quality and price to help patients choose their providers have grown. As of 2017, the sites with the most number of reviews in descending order included Healthgrades, Vitals.com, and RateMDs.com. Yelp, Google, and Facebook also host reviews with a large amount of traffic, although as of 2017 they had fewer medical reviews per doctor. Disputes around online reviews can lead to websites by health professionals alleging defamation. In 2018 Vitals.com was purchased by WebMD which is owned by Internet Brands.

Patient safety organization#United States|Patient safety organizations and government programs which have historically assessed quality have made their data more accessible over the internet; notable examples include the HospitalCompare by CMS and the LeapFrog Group's hospitalsafetygrade.org.

Patient-oriented software may also help in other ways, including general education and appointments.

Disclosure of legal disputes including medical license complaints or malpractice lawsuits has also been made easier. Every state discloses license status and at least some disciplinary action to the public, but as of 2018, this was not accessible via the internet for a few states. Consumers can look up medical licenses in a national database, DocInfo.org, maintained by the medical licensing organizations Other tools include DocFinder at docfinder.docboard.org The trend to disclosure is controversial and generate significant public debate, particularly about opening up the National Practitioner Data Bank. In 1996, Massachusetts became the first state to require detailed disclosure of malpractice claims.

There is also the case of the Internet, which serves as a repository of information and expert content that can be used to "self-diagnose"  instead of going to their doctor. For instance, one need only enumerate symptoms as search parameters at Google and the Web search engine|search engine could identify the illness from the list of contents uploaded to the World Wide Web, particularly those provided by expert/medical sources. These advances may eventually have some effect on doctor visits from patients and change the role of the health professionals from "gatekeeper to Health care|secondary care to facilitator of information interpretation and decision-making." Apart from basic services provided by Google in Google Search|Search, there are also companies such as WebMD that already offer dedicated symptom-checking apps.

