In the Alps|Italian Alps at a ski resort/casino, MI6 field agents Parker, Yang, and Bailey, supported by technician Rachel Stone, are tasked with extracting Mulvaney, an arms dealer who is there gambling on a US Navy SEAL combat operation somehow being livestreamed. When Yang is caught trying to sedate Mulvaney, a gunfight breaks out. Parker manages to extract Mulvaney to a cable car while the team heads down the mountain to confront Mulvaney's security.

Stone feigns injury to stay back and contact a mysterious agent named Jack feeding her probability information about how to safely get down the mountain and neutralize the incoming security.  She manages to avoid contact with her team, who do not realize she is undercover; while extracting Mulvaney, he apparently takes cyanide to commit suicide.

In London, Stone is reprimanded for risking her cover by Nomad, her superior. Concerned by the presence of a hacker she saw in the Alps, Stone discovers she is Keya Dhawan, an orphan with links to Indian criminal syndicates. Stone's organization, "the Charter" (which Bailey suspects exists), leaks MI6 Keya's location and sends them to track her down in with Stone still undercover. Upon arrival, they are ambushed by a squad of mercenaries. Jack orders Stone to evacuate, but she refuses, going back to save the team at the expense of her cover. After they escape, Stone reveals she is a Charter agent.

Parker murders Yang and Bailey, revealing himself as a double agent working with Keya. He admits to covertly murdering Mulvaney as part of his mission to find The Heart, a quantum computer used to guide the Charter's missions. Parker paralyzes Stone with poison before planting a device in her to act as a trojan horse to infiltrate Charter systems. When Stone is recovered and taken to Charter HQ, the device begins breaching security. Stone cuts out the device, but the hackers learn the Heart's location and Nomad suspends Stone.

Nomad meets with the other 3 "Kings" running the charter, who reveal that Parker was an MI6 agent deliberately left for dead during an operation the Charter botched in Chechnya 8 years prior. Having learned from the hack that The Heart's command system is located in an airship over Africa, Parker and Keya fly to the ship. Stone intercepts them, but is unable to stop them from seizing The Heart and destroying the ship. She cuts the rope ladder to their helicopter and she and Keya parachute into the desert.

Keya informs Stone that she biometrically encrypted the Heart, and it is useless without her. A jeep picks up Stone and Keya and takes them to a village, which turns out to be a setup by Parker. Keya is captured and Stone escapes, eventually being rescued by another Charter operative. Stone goes to Iceland, where Parker is using a university supercomputer to exploit the Heart.

Parker uses the Heart to kill the other 3 Charter Kings and several operatives as well as trap the Charter in their bunker without an air supply; Keya becomes disillusioned with him since she intended to use the Heart only for financial gain. She helps Stone avoid an explosion set in a decoy location and reroutes her to Parker and the Heart's true location. Parker realizes Keya has betrayed him, and tries to force her to unencrypt the Heart.  Stone arrives in time to rescue her, and manages to kill Parker.  Keya uses the Heart to restore oxygen to the bunker and turns it back over to the Charter.

Four weeks later, Stone visits Keya in prison and offers her a job in the Charter. They then take on another mission as a new team of Stone, Jack and Keya.

