The term "Artificial Intelligence" itself was officially introduced by John McCarthy (computer scientist)|John McCarthy in 1956 during the Dartmouth Workshop, a pivotal event that marked the formal inception of AI as an academic discipline. The primary objective of this workshop was to delve into the possibilities of creating machines capable of simulating human intelligence, marking the commencement of a focused exploration into the realm of AI.

The Dartmouth workshop of 1956
was organized by Marvin Minsky, John McCarthy and two senior scientists: Claude Shannon and Nathaniel Rochester (computer scientist)|Nathan Rochester of IBM. The proposal for the conference included this assertion: "every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it".
The participants included Ray Solomonoff, Oliver Selfridge, Trenchard More, Arthur Samuel (computer scientist)|Arthur Samuel, Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon, all of whom would create important programs during the first decades of AI research.
At the workshop Newell and Simon debuted the "Logic Theorist" and McCarthy persuaded the attendees to accept "Artificial Intelligence" as the name of the field. (The term "Artificial Intelligence" was chosen by McCarthy to avoid associations with cybernetics and the influence of Norbert Wiener.)
The 1956 Dartmouth workshop was the moment that AI gained its name, its mission, its first success and its major players, and is widely considered the birth of AI.

The programs developed in the years after the Dartmouth Workshop were, to most people, simply "astonishing": computers were solving algebra word problems, proving theorems in geometry and learning to speak English. Few at the time would have believed that such "intelligent" behavior by machines was possible at all. Researchers expressed an intense optimism in private and in print, predicting that a fully intelligent machine would be built in less than 20 years. Government agencies like DARPA poured money into the new field. Artificial Intelligence laboratories were set up at a number of British and US Universities in the latter 1950s and early 1960s.

The principal difficulty was that, for many problems, the number of possible paths through the "maze" was simply astronomical (a situation known as a "combinatorial explosion"). Researchers would reduce the search space by using heuristics or "Rule of thumb|rules of thumb" that would eliminate those paths that were unlikely to lead to a solution.

Allen Newell|Newell and Herbert A. Simon|Simon tried to capture a general version of this algorithm in a program called the "General Problem Solver". Other "searching" programs were able to accomplish impressive tasks like solving problems in geometry and algebra, such as Herbert Gelernter's Geometry Theorem Prover (1958) and Symbolic Automatic Integrator (SAINT), written by Marvin Minsky|Minsky's student James Slagle (1961). Other programs searched through goals and subgoals to plan actions, like the Stanford Research Institute Problem Solver|STRIPS system developed at Stanford to control the behavior of their robot Shakey the Robot|Shakey.

