Several philosophers had strong objections to the claims being made by AI researchers. One of the earliest was John Lucas (philosopher)|John Lucas, who argued that Gödel's incompleteness theorem showed that a formal system (such as a computer program) could never see the truth of certain statements, while a human being could. Hubert Dreyfus ridiculed the broken promises of the 1960s and critiqued the assumptions of AI, arguing that human reasoning actually involved very little "symbol processing" and a great deal of embodied cognition|embodied, instinctive, unconscious "ready-to-hand|know how". John Searle's Chinese Room argument, presented in 1980, attempted to show that a program could not be said to "understand" the symbols that it uses (a quality called "intentionality"). If the symbols have no meaning for the machine, Searle argued, then the machine can not be described as "thinking".

These critiques were not taken seriously by AI researchers, often because they seemed so far off the point. Problems like intractability (complexity)|intractability and Commonsense reasoning|commonsense knowledge seemed much more immediate and serious. It was unclear what difference "ready-to-hand|know how" or "intentionality" made to an actual computer program. Marvin Minsky|Minsky said of Dreyfus and Searle "they misunderstand, and should be ignored." Dreyfus, who taught at MIT, was given a cold shoulder: he later said that AI researchers "dared not be seen having lunch with me." Joseph Weizenbaum, the author of ELIZA, felt his colleagues' treatment of Hubert Dreyfus|Dreyfus was unprofessional and childish. Although he was an outspoken critic of Dreyfus' positions, he "deliberately made it plain that theirs was not the way to treat a human being."

Weizenbaum began to have serious ethical doubts about AI when Kenneth Colby wrote a "computer program which can conduct psychotherapeutic dialogue" based on ELIZA. Weizenbaum was disturbed that Colby saw a mindless program as a serious therapeutic tool. A feud began, and the situation was not helped when Colby did not credit Weizenbaum for his contribution to the program. In 1976, Joseph Weizenbaum|Weizenbaum published ''Computer Power and Human Reason'' which argued that the misuse of artificial intelligence has the potential to devalue human life.

