Main|Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz}}
File:Christoph Bernhard Francke - Bildnis des Philosophen Leibniz (ca. 1695).jpg|thumb|200x200px|Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) developed [[logic in a binary number system and has been called the "founder of computer science".]] 
In 1702, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz developed logic in a formal, mathematical sense with his writings on the binary numeral system. Leibniz simplified the binary system and articulated logical properties such as conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, inclusion, and the empty set. He anticipated Lagrange polynomial|Lagrangian interpolation and algorithmic information theory. His calculus ratiocinator anticipated aspects of the universal Turing machine. In 1961, Norbert Wiener suggested that Leibniz should be considered the patron saint of cybernetics. Wiener is quoted with "Indeed, the general idea of a computing machine is nothing but a mechanization of Leibniz's Calculus Ratiocinator." But it took more than a century before George Boole published his Boolean algebra (logic)|Boolean algebra in 1854 with a complete system that allowed computational processes to be mathematically modeled.

By this time, the first mechanical devices driven by a binary pattern had been invented. The industrial revolution had driven forward the mechanization of many tasks, and this included weaving. Punched cards controlled Joseph Marie Jacquard's loom in 1801, where a hole punched in the card indicated a binary ''one'' and an unpunched spot indicated a binary ''zero''. Jacquard's loom was far from being a computer, but it did illustrate that machines could be driven by binary systems. 

Two other inventors, Leonardo Torres Quevedo and Vannevar Bush, also did follow on research based on Babbage's work. In his ''Essays on Automatics'' (1914), Torres designed an analytical electromechanical machine that was controlled by a Read-only memory|read-only program and introduced the idea of floating-point arithmetic. In 1920, to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the invention of the arithmometer, he presented in Paris the Leonardo Torres y Quevedo#Analytical machines| Electromechanical Arithmometer, which consisted of an arithmetic unit connected to a (possibly remote) typewriter, on which commands could be typed and the results printed automatically. Bush's paper ''Instrumental Analysis'' (1936) discussed using existing IBM punch card machines to implement Babbage's design. In the same year he started the Rapid Arithmetical Machine project to investigate the problems of constructing an electronic digital computer.

