By the early 1990s several of Dreyfus' radical opinions had become mainstream.

'''Failed predictions'''. As Dreyfus had foreseen, the grandiose predictions of early AI researchers failed to come true. Fully intelligent machines (now known as "Artificial general intelligence|strong AI") did not appear in the mid-1970s as predicted. HAL 9000 (whose capabilities for natural language, perception and problem solving were based on the advice and opinions of Marvin Minsky) did not appear in the year 2001. "AI researchers", writes Nicolas Fearn, "clearly have some explaining to do." Today researchers are far more reluctant to make the kind of predictions that were made in the early days. (Although some futurists, such as Ray Kurzweil, are still given to the same kind of optimism.)

'''The biological assumption''', although common in the forties and early fifties, was no longer assumed by most AI researchers by the time Dreyfus published ''What Computers Can't Do''. Although many still argue that it is essential to reverse-engineer the brain by simulating the action of neurons (such as Ray Kurzweil or Jeff Hawkins), they don't assume that neurons are essentially digital, but rather that the action of analog neurons can be simulated by digital machines to a reasonable level of accuracy. (Alan Turing had made this same observation as early as 1950.)

'''The psychological assumption''' and '''unconscious skills'''. Many AI researchers have come to agree that human reasoning does not consist primarily of high-level symbol manipulation. In fact, since Dreyfus first published his critiques in the 60s, AI research in general has moved away from symbolic AI|high level symbol manipulation, towards new models that are intended to capture more of our ''unconscious'' reasoning. Daniel Crevier writes that by 1993, unlike 1965, AI researchers "no longer made the psychological assumption", and had continued forward without it. 

In the 1980s, these new "sub-symbolic" approaches included: 
* Computational intelligence paradigms, such as neural nets, evolutionary algorithms and so on are mostly directed at simulated unconscious reasoning.  Dreyfus himself agrees that these sub-symbolic methods can capture the kind of "tendencies" and "attitudes" that he considers essential for intelligence and expertise.
* Research into commonsense knowledge has focused on reproducing the "background" or context of knowledge.
* Robotics researchers like Hans Moravec and Rodney Brooks were among the first to realize that unconscious skills would prove to be the most difficult to reverse engineer. (See Moravec's paradox.)  Brooks would spearhead a movement in the late 80s that took direct aim at the use of high-level symbols, called Nouvelle AI. The situated movement in robotics research attempts to capture our unconscious skills at perception and attention.

In the 1990s and the early decades of the 21st century, AI#Statistical learning|statistics-based approaches to machine learning used techniques related to economics and statistics to allow machines to "guess" &ndash; to make inexact, probabilistic decisions and predictions based on experience and learning. These programs simulate the way our unconscious instincts are able to perceive, notice anomalies and make quick judgements, similar to what Dreyfus called "sizing up the situation and reacting", but here the "situation" consists of vast amounts of numerical data. These techniques are highly successful and are currently widely used in both industry and academia.

This research has gone forward without any direct connection to Dreyfus' work.

'''Knowing-how and knowing-that'''. Research in psychology and economics has been able to show that Dreyfus' (and Heidegger's) speculation about the nature of human problem solving was essentially correct. Daniel Kahnemann and Amos Tversky collected a vast amount of hard evidence that human beings use two very different methods to solve problems, which they named "system 1" and "system 2". System one, also known as the  adaptive unconscious, is fast, intuitive and unconscious. System 2 is slow, logical and deliberate. Their research was collected in the book ''Thinking, Fast and Slow'', and inspired Malcolm Gladwell's popular book ''Blink (book)|Blink''. As with AI, this research was entirely independent of both Dreyfus and Heidegger.

