File:HEX BUG DELTA 03.jpg|thumb|A small robot designed to replicate insect functionality. Often used as toys.
Robot locomotion has frequently been inspired by insect physiology.  These robots typically take the form of a hexapod (robotics)|hexapod.  Research has become multidisciplinary, involving not only robotics engineers, but also biologists, especially neurobiologists.  Engineers gain from thisrelationship by acquiring a better understanding of the functioning of the insects they have used to model their robots.  Biologists in turn, gain a platform on which they can test their theories of insect motor control.

Building a robot that can walk on a flat surface in the laboratory is a fairly straightforward task.  A hexapod robot with mechanically linked simple pegs for legs will achieve this task.  Then again, a wheeled robot might be even simpler, but may be entirely unable to solve the much more difficult problem of crossing rough terrain with unpredictable obstacles.  For this, articulated joints in legs like a real insect, with Sensory-motor coupling|sensor-motor control like the neurology of a real insect are needed.  A simple rhythmic cycle of the legs will not do.  The legs and joints must be controlled individually and in combination according to information received from limb position and load sensors.

The gait of insects changes with desired speed.  Research has shown that these gait patterns can still be generated locally in many insects even when completely disconnected from the central nervous system.  In some insects, for instance the cockroach, the gait changes in a running insect partly because the nervous system of the insect cannot respond rapidly enough.  A running cockcroach changes its gait to pushing with all three legs on one side together.  The characteristic side-to-side motion of the animal is at the biomechanical resonant frequency set by the insect's weight and spring stiffness of the combined legs.  This mode needs no input from an external controller and it is both efficient and stable.  Researchers recognise the advantages of features of real insects, but as of 2004, "they have only rarely come together in a robot..."

