In the late 1980s, riding the wave of the acid house and early rave party scenes, United Kingdom|UK-based groups such as The Orb and The KLF produced ambient house, a genre that Fusion (music)|fused house music (particularly acid house) with ambient music. By the early 1990s, the increasingly distinct music associated with dance music experimentation had gained prominence with releases on a variety of mostly UK-based record labels, including Warp (1989), Black Dog Productions (1989), R&S Records (1989), Carl Craig's Planet E, Rising High Records (1991), Aphex Twin|Richard James's Rephlex Records (1991), Kirk Degiorgio's Applied Rhythmic Technology (1991), Eevo Lute Muzique (1991), General Production Recordings (1989), Soma Quality Recordings (1991), Peacefrog Records (1991), and Metamorphic Recordings (1992).

In 1992, Warp released ''Artificial Intelligence (compilation album)|Artificial Intelligence'', the first album in the Artificial Intelligence (series)|''Artificial Intelligence'' series. Subtitled "electronic listening music from Warp", the record was a collection of tracks from artists such as Autechre, B12 (band)|B12, Black Dog Productions, Aphex Twin and The Orb, under various aliases. This would help establish the ambient techno sound of the early 1990s. Steve Beckett, co-owner of Warp, has said the electronic music that the label was releasing then was targeting a post-nightclub|club, home-listening audience. Following the success of the ''Artificial Intelligence'' series, "intelligent techno" became the favoured term, although ''ambient''—without a qualifying ''house'' or ''techno'' suffix, but still referring to a hybrid form—was a common synonym. "armchair techno", and "electronica", but all were attempts to describe an emerging offshoot of electronic dance music that was being enjoyed by the "sedentary and stay at home". At the same time, the UK market was saturated with increasingly frenetic breakbeat and sample-laden hardcore techno records that quickly became formulaic. ''Rave'' had become a "dirty word", so as an alternative, it was common for London nightclubs to advertise that they were playing "intelligent" or "pure" techno, appealing to a "discerning" crowd that considered the hardcore sound to be too commercial. Off the Internet, the same phrase appeared in both the U.S. and UK music press in late 1992, in reference to Jam & Spoon's ''Tales from a Danceographic Ocean'' and the music of The Future Sound of London. Another instance of the phrase appeared on Usenet in April 1993 in reference to The Black Dog's album ''Bytes''. And in July 1993, in his review of an ethno-dance compilation for ''NME'', Ben Willmott replaced ''techno'' with ''dance music'', writing "...current 'intelligent' dance music owes much more to Eastern mantra-like repetition and neo-ambient instrumentation than the disco era which preceded the advent of acid and techno."

Wider public use of such terms on the Internet came in August 1993, when Alan Parry announced the existence of a new electronic mailing list for discussion of "intelligent" dance music: the "Intelligent Dance Music list", or "IDM List" for short.

The first message, sent on 1 August 1993, was entitled "Can Dumb People Enjoy IDM, Too?". A reply from the list server (computing)|server's system administrator and founder of Hyperreal.org Brian Behlendorf, revealed that Parry originally wanted to create a list devoted to discussion of the music on the Rephlex label, but they decided together to expand its charter to include music similar to what was on Rephlex or that was in different genres but which had been made with similar approaches. They picked the word "intelligent" because it had already appeared on ''Artificial Intelligence'' and because it connoted being something beyond just music for dancing, while still being open to interpretation.

File:Autechre1.jpg|right|thumb|[[Autechre, a notable electronic music act associated with IDM.]] Artists that appeared in the first discussions on the list included Autechre, Atom Heart, LFO (British band)|LFO and Rephlex Records artists such as Aphex Twin, μ-ziq and Luke Vibert; plus artists such as The Orb, Richard H. Kirk and The Future Sound of London, and even artists like System 7 (band)|System 7, William Orbit, Sabres of Paradise, Orbital (band)|Orbital, Plastikman and Björk. By the end of 1996, Boards of Canada and the [https://schematicmusiccompany.bandcamp.com/ Schematic Records] label were among the usual topics of discussion, alongside perennial favourites like Aphex Twin and the Warp repertoire.

, the mailing list is still active.

