Warp's Artificial Intelligence II|second ''Artificial Intelligence'' compilation was released in 1994. The album featured fragments of posts from the IDM mailing list incorporated into typography|typographic artwork by The Designers Republic. Sleeve notes by David Toop acknowledged the genre's multitude of musical and cultural influences and suggested none should be considered more important than any other. In Miami, Florida, labels like Schematic, Merck Records, Nophi Recordings and The Beta Bodega Coalition released material by artists such as Phoenecia, Dino Felipe, Machinedrum and Proem. Another burgeoning scene was the Chicago/Milwaukee area, with labels such as Addict, Chocolate Industries, Hefty Records|Hefty and Zod supporting artists like Doormouse, TRS-80 (group)|TRS-80, Telefon Tel Aviv and Emotional Joystick. Tigerbeat 6, a San Francisco-based label has released IDM from artists such as Cex (musician)|Cex, Kid 606 and Kevin Blechdom.

In 2007, Igloo Magazine observed that "IDM as we knew it is a distant memory, with reminders from the big names now depressingly infrequent, however IDM as we now know it is very much alive, albeit in a less influential and popular, but still respectable form", with a third wave of artist having become active around 2004.


In 2018, Fact (UK magazine)|Fact Magazine puts the focus on Miami as a central importer/exporter of IDM in the United States. The talent coming out of Miami included the likes of Richard Devine (Schematic/Warp (record label)|Warp), Alpha 606, Scott Herren|Prefuse-73 (Schematic/Warp (record label)|Warp), Push Button Objects, Otto von Schirach (Schematic) and many more. In 1993, Romulo Del Castillo and Omar Clemetson (Supersoul) began producing both trip hop and IDM. 2 years later Del Castillo and Josh Kay would later form the duo Soul Oddity, which would eventually release their debut album [https://www.discogs.com/master/155672-Soul-Oddity-Tone-Capsule Tone Capsule] on Astralwerks (an EMI subsidiary) in 1996.

