In 2023, Manyika was appointed to the board of Airbnb.

Manyika has been involved with a number of think tanks. a trustee of the Aspen Institute, and former trustee of the World Affairs Council (Northern California)|World Affairs Council of California.

He is involved with a number of academic institutions. In 2021, he was appointed a Visiting Professor at Oxford’s Blavatnik School of Government. He is on the advisory boards of Harvard's Hutchins Center for African and African American Research, which includes the W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute, and the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard and is on the advisory councils of MIT’s Schwarzman College of Computing, the Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence at Stanford University. Concerning digitization, he co-chairs Stanford University’s Digital Economy Lab, and is on the advisory board of the Program on Innovation and Diffusion at the London School of Economics. He was previously on the advisory boards of the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy (IDE) and the Oxford Internet Institute, having joined the latter in September 2011, and the University of Toronto’s Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society. He has been a member of the AI Index team at Stanford and was an officer of the One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence, a project at Stanford University where experts discuss the future societal impacts of AI and was on the advisory board of the University of California, Berkeley School of Information.

Manyika has served on the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine's Committee on Responsible Computing Research and its Application. He is a member of the Science, Engineering and Technology Committee of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has been elected a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, a life fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, an inaugural distinguished fellow of Stanford's Institute for Human-Centered AI, a distinguished fellow in ethics and AI at Oxford, a research fellow of DeepMind and a visiting fellow of All Souls College and a fellow at Balliol College, Oxford. Other foundations where Manyika is a board member include the Hewlett Foundation, and the Markle Foundation. He has been a trustee of the X Prize Foundation|XPrize Foundation and an unpaid senior advisor at the philanthropic Schmidt Science Fellows|Schmidt Futures, where he has co-chaired the AI2050 Initiative. Through the Hutchins Center for African and African American Research|Hutchins Center for African & African American Research, he established the J.M.D. Manyika Fellowship, named after his father, to support scholars and artists from countries in Southern Africa. He was previously on the board of the Khan Academy, which offers free education online.

