In 2001 at the age of 18, Condon landed the role of Mairead in ''The Lieutenant of Inishmore'' by Martin McDonagh which she performed at the Royal Shakespeare Company and in 2006 at the Lyceum Theatre in New York City|New York. For the production she recorded the song "The Patriot Game" with The Pogues. That same year, Condon played the role of Ophelia in ''Hamlet'', making her the youngest actress to ever play that role for the RSC. In 2009, she appeared in another play by Martin McDonagh, ''The Cripple of Inishmaan'', for which she won a Lucille Lortel Awards|Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Featured Actress in a Play and a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Ensemble Performance.

Condon's movie roles include Kate Kelly (outlaw)|Kate Kelly, Ned Kelly's outlaw sister, in 2003's ''Ned Kelly (2003 film)|Ned Kelly'' and an appearance in the 2003 Irish independent film ''Intermission (film)|Intermission'' with Cillian Murphy, Kelly Macdonald, and Colin Farrell. She was in the 2005 Jet Li action-thriller ''Unleashed (2005 film)|Unleashed''. In 2005, Condon co-starred as Octavia of the Julii, sister of the Roman Emperor Augustus, in the HBO/BBC series ''Rome (TV series)|Rome''. She voiced the artificial intelligence F.R.I.D.A.Y., Tony Stark (Marvel Cinematic Universe)|Iron Man's replacement for J.A.R.V.I.S. in the Marvel Studios films ''Avengers: Age of Ultron'', ''Captain America: Civil War'', ''Spider-Man: Homecoming'', ''Avengers: Infinity War'', and ''Avengers: Endgame''.<!--additional WebCitation archive: http://www.webcitation.org/6YFd9dc1a-->

After reuniting with Martin McDonagh in the 2017 film ''Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri'', Condon played a major role in McDonagh's 2022 film ''The Banshees of Inisherin'' as the long-suffering sister of Colin Farrell's character. Condon's performance in the film earned her immense critical praise, garnering several accolades, including a win for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role and nominations for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture|Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress–Motion Picture and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role.

