File:Max Tegmark.jpg|thumb|right|Professor Max Tegmark, author of ''Life 3.0''.

One criticism of the book by ''Kirkus Reviews'' is that some of the scenarios or solutions in the book are a stretch or somewhat prophetic: "Tegmark's solutions to inevitable mass unemployment are a stretch." AI researcher Stuart J. Russell, writing in ''Nature (journal)|Nature'', said: "I am unlikely to disagree strongly with the premise of ''Life 3.0''. Life, Tegmark argues, may or may not spread through the Universe and 'flourish for billions or trillions of years' because of decisions we make now — a possibility both seductive and overwhelming." Writing in ''Sciencemag.org|Science'', Haym Hirsh called it "a highly readable book that complements The Second Machine Age's economic perspective on the near-term implications of recent accomplishments in AI and the more detailed analysis of how we might get from where we are today to AGI and even the superhuman AI in Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies|Superintelligence." ''The Sunday Telegraph|The Telegraph'' called it "One of the very best overviews of the arguments around artificial intelligence". The ''Christian Science Monitor'' said "Although it's probably not his intention, much of what Tegmark writes will quietly terrify his readers." ''Publishers Weekly'' gave a positive review, but also stated that Tegmark's call for researching how to maintain control over superintelligent machines "sits awkwardly beside his acknowledgment that controlling such godlike entities will be almost impossible." ''Library Journal'' called it a "must-read" for technologists, but stated the book was not for the casual reader. The ''Wall Street Journal'' called it "lucid and engaging"; however, it cautioned readers that the controversial notion that superintelligence could run amok has more credence than it does few years ago, but is still fiercely opposed by many computer scientists.

Rather than endorse a specific future, the book invites readers to think about what future they would like to see, and to discuss their thoughts on the Future of Life Website. The ''Wall Street Journal'' review called this attitude noble but naive, and criticized the referenced Web site for being "chockablock with promo material for the book". and made on the New York Times business bestseller list in September and October 2017.

Former President Barack Obama included the book in his "best of 2018" list.

Business magnate Elon Musk (who had previously endorsed the thesis that, under some scenarios, existential risk from artificial general intelligence|advanced AI could jeopardize human survival) recommended Life 3.0 as "worth reading".

