File:C16orf95 protein secondary structure prediction.png|thumb|A protein's amino acid sequence annotated with the protein secondary structure. Each amino acid is labeled as either an alpha helix, a beta-sheet, or a coil.
Proteins, strings of amino acids, gain much of their function from protein folding, where they conform into a three-dimensional structure, including the Protein primary structure|primary structure, the Protein secondary structure|secondary structure (Alpha helix|alpha helices and beta sheets), the Protein tertiary structure|tertiary structure, and the Protein quaternary structure|quaternary structure.

Protein secondary structure prediction is a main focus of this subfield as tertiary and quaternary structures are determined based on the secondary structure. Automatic feature learning reaches an accuracy of 82-84%.  The theoretical limit for three-state protein secondary structure is 88–90%. Currently, limitations and challenges predominate in the implementation of machine learning tools due to the amount of data in environmental samples. Supercomputers and web servers have made access to these tools easier. The high dimensionality of microbiome datasets is a major challenge in studying the microbiome; this significantly limits the power of current approaches for identifying true differences and increases the chance of false discoveries.

Despite their importance, machine learning tools related to metagenomics have focused on the study of gut microbiota and the relationship with digestive diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), ''Clostridioides difficile'' infection (CDI), colorectal cancer and diabetes, seeking better diagnosis and treatments.

In addition, random forest (RF) methods and implemented importance measures help in the identification of microbiome species that can be used to distinguish diseased and non-diseased samples. However, the performance of a decision tree and the diversity of decision trees in the ensemble significantly influence the performance of RF algorithms. The generalization error for RF measures how accurate the individual classifiers are and their interdependence. Therefore, the high dimensionality problems of microbiome datasets pose challenges. Effective approaches require many possible variable combinations, which exponentially increases the computational burden as the number of features increases. designed an R package called MegaR. This package allows working with 16S rRNA and whole metagenomic sequences to make taxonomic profiles and classification models by machine learning models. MegaR includes a comfortable visualization environment to improve the user experience. Machine learning in environmental metagenomics can help to answer questions related to the interactions between microbial communities and ecosystems, e.g. the work of Xun et al., in 2021 where the use of different machine learning methods offered insights on the relationship among the soil, microbiome biodiversity, and ecosystem stability.

