Main|Supervised learning}}
File:Svm max sep hyperplane with margin.png|thumb|A [[support-vector machine is a supervised learning model that divides the data into regions separated by a linear classifier|linear boundary. Here, the linear boundary divides the black circles from the white.]]
Supervised learning algorithms build a mathematical model of a set of data that contains both the inputs and the desired outputs. The data is known as training data, and consists of a set of training examples. Each training example has one or more inputs and the desired output, also known as a supervisory signal.  In the mathematical model, each training example is represented by an array data structure|array or vector, sometimes called a feature vector, and the training data is represented by a Matrix (mathematics)|matrix. Through Mathematical optimization#Computational optimization techniques|iterative optimization of an Loss function|objective function, supervised learning algorithms learn a function that can be used to predict the output associated with new inputs. An optimal function allows the algorithm to correctly determine the output for inputs that were not a part of the training data. An algorithm that improves the accuracy of its outputs or predictions over time is said to have learned to perform that task. Classification algorithms are used when the outputs are restricted to a limited set of values, and regression algorithms are used when the outputs may have any numerical value within a range. As an example, for a classification algorithm that filters emails, the input would be an incoming email, and the output would be the name of the folder in which to file the email.

Similarity learning is an area of supervised machine learning closely related to regression and classification, but the goal is to learn from examples using a similarity function that measures how similar or related two objects are. It has applications in ranking, recommender system|recommendation systems, visual identity tracking, face verification, and speaker verification.

