File:Confocal measurement of 1-euro-star 3d and euro.png|thumb|left|3D profile of a coin (partial) measured with a modern [[confocal microscope|confocal white light microscope]]

Minsky's inventions include the first head-mounted graphical display (1963) and the confocal microscope

Minsky's book ''Perceptrons (book)|Perceptrons'' (written with Seymour Papert) attacked the work of Frank Rosenblatt, and became the foundational work in the analysis of artificial neural networks. The book is the center of a controversy in the history of AI, as some claim it to have had great importance in discouraging research of neural networks in the 1970s, and contributing to the so-called "AI winter". He also founded several other AI models. His paper ''A framework for representing knowledge'' created a new paradigm in knowledge representation. While his ''Perceptrons'' is now more a historical than practical book, the theory of frames is in wide use. Minsky also wrote of the possibility that extraterrestrial life may think like humans, permitting communication.

In the early 1970s, at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab, Minsky and Papert started developing what came to be known as the Society of Mind theory.  The theory attempts to explain how what we call intelligence could be a product of the interaction of non-intelligent parts.  Minsky says that the biggest source of ideas about the theory came from his work in trying to create a machine that uses a robotic arm, a video camera, and a computer to build with children's blocks.  In 1986, Minsky published ''The Society of Mind'', a comprehensive book on the theory which, unlike most of his previously published work, was written for the general public.


In November 2006, Minsky published ''The Emotion Machine'', a book that critiques many popular theories of how human minds work and suggests alternative theories, often replacing simple ideas with more complex ones.  Recent drafts of the book are freely available from his webpage.

Minsky also invented a "gravity machine" that would ring a bell if the gravitational constant were to change, a theoretical possibility that is not expected to occur in the foreseeable future. on Stanley Kubrick's movie 2001: A Space Odyssey (film)|''2001: A Space Odyssey''; one of the movie's characters, Victor Kaminski, was named in Minsky's honor. Minsky is mentioned explicitly in Arthur C. Clarke's derivative novel of the same name, where he is portrayed as achieving a crucial break-through in artificial intelligence in the then-future 1980s, paving the way for HAL 9000 in the early 21st century:



In Fargo Season 3 episode 3 (titled "The Law of Non-Contradiction"), at least two allusions are made to Minsky.  The first, through the depiction of a "useless machine": a device that was invented by Minsky as a philosophical joke.  The second, through the depiction of an animation of a robot called "minsky" – a character in a sci-fi novel called "The Planet Wyh".

