Intel's venture capital arm (Intel Capital) recently invested in startup Lumiata, which uses AI to identify at-risk patients and develop care options.

Artificial intelligence in healthcare is the use of algorithms|complex algorithms and software to emulate human cognition in the analysis of complicated medical data. Specifically, AI is the ability for computer algorithms to approximate conclusions without direct human input.

What distinguishes AI technology from traditional technologies in health care is the ability to gain information, process it and give a well-defined output to the end-user. AI does this through machine learning algorithms. These algorithms can recognize patterns in behavior and create its own logic. In order to reduce the margin of error, AI algorithms need to be tested repeatedly. AI algorithms behave differently from humans in two ways: (1) algorithms are literal: if you set a goal, the algorithm can't adjust itself and only understand what it has been told explicitly, (2) and algorithms are black boxes; algorithms can predict extremely precise, but not the cause or the why.

The primary aim of health-related AI applications is to analyze relationships between prevention or treatment techniques and patient outcomes. AI programs have been developed and applied to practices such as medical diagnosis|diagnosis processes, Medical guideline|treatment protocol development, drug development, personalized medicine, and patient monitoring and care. Medical institutions such as The Mayo Clinic, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and National Health Service, have developed AI algorithms for their departments. Large technology companies such as IBM and Google, have also developed AI algorithms for healthcare. Additionally, hospitals are looking to AI solutions to support operational initiatives that increase cost saving, improve patient satisfaction, and satisfy their staffing and workforce needs.  Companies are developing predictive analytics solutions that help healthcare management|healthcare managers improve business operations through increasing utilization, decreasing patient boarding, reducing length of stay  and layoff|optimizing staffing levels.

The following medical fields are of interest in artificial intelligence research:

