File:Théâtre D’opéra Spatial.png|thumb|''[[Théâtre D'opéra Spatial'', a Midjourney image that won first prize in a digital art competition]]
File:Alice-and-Sparkle-claw-hand.jpg|thumb|Image from ''[[Alice and Sparkle'', a children's book illustrated by Midjourney. ''Time (magazine)|Time'' describes this image as "showing the limits of the AI-powered technology. The illustration has several apparent flaws, including the character appearing to have claws."]]

The program was used by the British magazine ''The Economist'' to create the front cover for an issue in June 2022. In Italy, the leading newspaper ''Corriere della Sera'' published a comic created with Midjourney by writer Vanni Santoni in August 2022. Charlie Warzel used Midjourney to generate two images of Alex Jones for Warzel's newsletter in ''The Atlantic''. The use of an AI-generated cover was criticised by people who felt it was taking jobs from artists. Warzel called his action a mistake in an article about his decision to use generated images. ''Last Week Tonight with John Oliver'' included a 10-minute segment on Midjourney in an episode broadcast in August 2022.

A Midjourney image called ''Théâtre D'opéra Spatial'' won first place in the digital art competition at the 2022 Colorado State Fair. Jason Allen, who wrote the Prompt engineering|prompt that led Midjourney to generate the image, printed the image onto a canvas and entered it into the competition using the name Jason M. Allen via Midjourney. Other digital artists were upset by the news. Allen was unapologetic, insisting that he followed the competition's rules. The two category judges were unaware that Midjourney used AI to generate images, although they later said that had they known this, they would have awarded Allen the top prize anyway.

In December 2022, Midjourney was used to create the images in an AI-generated Children's literature|children's book in the span of a weekend. Titled ''Alice and Sparkle'', the book features a young girl who builds a robot that becomes self-aware. The creator, Ammaar Reeshi, spent hours tweaking Midjourney prompts, rejecting hundreds of generated results to ultimately choose 13 illustrations for the book. Both the product and process drew criticism. One artist wrote that "the main problem... is that it was trained off of artists' work. It's our creations, our distinct styles that we created, that we did not consent to being used."

File:Pope Francis in puffy winter jacket.jpg|thumb|A fake Midjourney-created image of [[Pope Francis wearing a puffer jacket, which went viral in 2023]]
In 2023, the realism of AI-based text-to-image model|text-to-image generators, such as Midjourney, DALL-E, or Stable Diffusion, reached such a high level that it led to a significant wave of Viral phenomenon|viral AI-generated photos. Widespread attention was gained by a Midjourney-generated photo of Pope Francis wearing a white puffer coat, the fictional arrest of Donald Trump, and a hoax of an attack on the The Pentagon|Pentagon, as well as the usage in professional creative arts.

Research has suggested that the images Midjourney generates can be biased. For example, even neutral prompts in one study returned unequal results on the aspects of gender, skin color, and location. A study by researchers at the nonprofit group Center for Countering Digital Hate found the tool to be easy to generate racist and conspiratorial images.

