In animals, the brain, or ''encephalon'' (Greek (language)|Greek for "in the head"), is the control center of the central nervous system, responsible for thought. In most animals, the brain is located in the head, protected by the skull and close to the primary sensory apparatus of Visual perception|vision, Hearing (sense)|hearing, equilibrioception, taste and olfaction. While all vertebrates have a brain, most invertebrates have either a centralized brain or collections of individual ganglion|ganglia. Primitive animals such as sponges do not have a brain at all. Brains can be extremely complex. For example, the human brain contains around 86 billion neurons, each linked to as many as 10,000 others.

Understanding the relationship between the brain and the mind&nbsp;–the mind–body problem&nbsp;– is one of the central issues in the history of philosophy, a challenging problem both philosophically and scientifically. There are three major philosophical schools of thought concerning the answer: dualism, materialism, and idealism. Dualism (philosophy of mind)|Dualism holds that the mind exists independently of the brain; materialism holds that mental phenomena are identical to neuronal phenomena; and idealism (philosophy)|idealism holds that only mental phenomena exist. Descartes, who thought extensively about mind-brain relationships, found it possible to explain reflexes and other simple behaviors in The Description of the Human Body|mechanistic terms, although he did not believe that complex thought, especially language, could be explained by reference to the physical brain alone.

The most straightforward scientific evidence of a strong relationship between the physical brain matter and the mind is the impact physical alterations to the brain have on the mind, such as with traumatic brain injury and psychoactive drug use. Philosopher Patricia Churchland notes that drug-mind interaction indicates an intimate connection between the brain and the mind.  A relatively popular example of the link between the brain and the mind is the case of Phineas Gage. Gage suffered impalement by an iron rod, which passed through his skull from below his left eye and left out the top of his head. Even though Gage survived the accident, he was not the same person. He had a complete personality change along with many changes in his social and professional relationships. It has been noted, however, that Gage's most serious mental changes were only temporary, and that he made a reasonable social and mental recovery.

In addition to the philosophical questions, the relationship between mind and brain involves a number of scientific questions, including understanding the relationship between mental activity and brain activity, the exact mechanisms by which drugs influence cognition, and the neural correlates of consciousness.

Theoretical approaches to explain how mind emerges from the brain include connectionism, computationalism and Bayesian brain.

