The mental phenomena brought about by the faculties of the mind have been categorized according to various distinctions. Important distinctions group mental phenomena together according to whether they are ''sensory'', ''qualitative'', ''propositional'', ''intentional'', ''conscious'', ''occurrent'' or ''rational''. These different distinctions result in overlapping categorizations. Some mental phenomena, like perception or bodily awareness, are ''sensory'', i.e. based on the senses. These phenomena are of special interest to empiricism|empiricists, who hold that they are our only source of knowledge about the external world. They are contrasted with ''non-sensory'' phenomena like thoughts or beliefs, which do not involve sense impressions. Sensory states are closely related to ''qualitative states'', which have qualia and are therefore associated with a subjective feeling of what it is like to be in this state. This is the case, for example, when actively desiring something. Another problem with this contrast is that some mental phenomena, like perceptions, are both sensory and propositional. Propositional attitudes are ''Intentionality|intentional states'', which have as their characteristic that they refer to or are about objects or states of affairs. This claim is sometimes even extended to all sensory phenomena. It sometimes held that all intentional states are propositional. While this is true for the paradigmatic cases, it has been argued that there is a form of object-directed intentionality, like the fear of snakes, that does not involve propositional attitudes, like the fear that one will be bitten by snakes.

Another important distinction among mental states is whether they are ''conscious'' or not. Often two types of consciousness are distinguished: ''Consciousness#Types of consciousness|phenomenal consciousness and access consciousness''. ''Phenomenal consciousness'' refers to actual experience. A common view is that some states, like sensations or pains, are necessarily associated with phenomenal consciousness while other states, like beliefs and desires, can be present both with and without phenomenal consciousness. According to some views, conscious mental states are more basic while unconscious states only count as mental if they can arise in phenomenal consciousness. Mental phenomena are ''rational'' if they are well justified or obey the norms of rationality. ''Irrational mental phenomena'', on the other hand, violate these norms. But not all mental phenomena are rationally evaluable: some are ''arational'' and exist outside the domain of rationality. They include urges, dizziness or hunger while beliefs and intentions are the paradigmatic examples of rationally evaluable states. Some hold that rationality depends only on structural principles that govern how different mental states should relate to each other while others define rationality in terms of responding correctly to reasons.

