Main|Philosophy of artificial intelligence}}

File:Forest of synthetic pyramidal dendrites grown using Cajal's laws of neuronal branching.png|thumb|[[Computer simulation of the branching architecture of the dendrites of pyramidal neurons]] In 1950 Alan M. Turing published "Computing machinery and intelligence" in ''Mind (journal)|Mind'', in which he proposed that machines could be tested for intelligence using questions and answers. This process is now named the Turing Test. The term Artificial Intelligence (AI) was first used by John McCarthy (computer scientist)|John McCarthy who considered it to mean "the science and engineering of making intelligent machines". It can also refer to intelligence (trait)|intelligence as exhibited by an artificial (''man-made'', ''non-natural'', ''manufactured'') entity. AI is studied in overlapping fields of computer science, psychology, neuroscience and engineering, dealing with intelligent behavior, learning and adaptation and usually developed using customized machines or computers.

Research in AI is concerned with producing machines to automate tasks requiring intelligent behavior. Examples include control system|control, Automated planning and scheduling|planning and scheduling, the ability to answer diagnostic and consumer questions, handwriting recognition|handwriting, natural language, speech recognition|speech and facial recognition system|facial recognition. As such, the study of AI has also become an engineering discipline, focused on providing solutions to real life problems, knowledge mining, software applications, strategy games like computer chess and other video games. One of the biggest limitations of AI is in the domain of actual machine comprehension. Consequentially natural-language understanding and connectionism (where behavior of neural networks is investigated) are areas of active research and development.

The debate about the nature of the mind is relevant to the development of artificial intelligence. If the mind is indeed a thing separate from or higher than the functioning of the brain, then hypothetically it would be much more difficult to recreate within a machine, if it were possible at all. If, on the other hand, the mind is no more than the aggregated functions of the brain, then it will be possible to create a machine with a recognisable mind (though possibly only with computers much different from today's), by simple virtue of the fact that such a machine already exists in the form of the human brain.

