In the early days of artificial intelligence research, leading researchers often predicted that they would be able to create thinking machines in just a few decades (see history of artificial intelligence#Optimism|history of artificial intelligence). Their optimism stemmed in part from the fact that they had been successful at writing programs that used logic, solved algebra and geometry problems and played games like checkers and chess. Logic and algebra are difficult for people and are considered a sign of intelligence. Many prominent researchers}} assumed that, having (almost) solved the "hard" problems, the "easy" problems of computer vision|vision and commonsense reasoning would soon fall into place. They were wrong (see also AI winter), and one reason is that these problems are not easy at all, but incredibly difficult. The fact that they had solved problems like logic and algebra was irrelevant, because these problems are extremely easy for machines to solve..}}

Rodney Brooks explains that, according to early AI research, intelligence was "best characterized as the things that highly educated male scientists found challenging", such as chess, symbolic integration, proving math|mathematical theorems and solving complicated word algebra problems. "The things that children of four or five years could do effortlessly, such as visually distinguishing between a coffee cup and a chair, or walking around on two legs, or finding their way from their bedroom to the living room were not thought of as activities requiring intelligence."

In the 1980s, this would lead Brooks to pursue a new direction in artificial intelligence and robotics research. He decided to build intelligent machines that had "No cognition. Just sensing and action. That is all I would build and completely leave out what traditionally was thought of as the ''intelligence'' of artificial intelligence."<ref name=Brooks2002/> He called this new direction "Nouvelle AI".

Similarly, successful 21st century AI applications don't simulate step-by-step "intelligent" problem solving, they simulate the fast, "intuitive" judgements people use to instantly and automatically recognize patterns and anomalies.

