File:League of Legends World Championship 2017 Finals.jpg|thumb|The stage for the [[2017 League of Legends World Championship|2017 ''League of Legends'' World Championship Finals held in the Beijing National Stadium, China|alt=]]
<!-- eSports -->
In the original ''Defense of the Ancients'' (''DotA''), each player controls one powerful unit rather than a large army. While it still kept the large scale, core mechanics, and goals of the real-time strategy games, ''DotA'' attempted to avoid "clickfest" gameplay in which high actions per minute scores are mandatory for efficient playing, changing focus to the actual teamwork, coordination, and tactics. This made the Mod (video games)|mod highly popular, as its dynamic and unpredictable fights, complex map, and hero-centric gameplay create a more competitive environment and opportunities for outplaying the enemy team. By the early 2010s, multiplayer online battle arena has become a prominent genre in esports tournaments. The genre has seen further growth in popularity since the year 2015 – among the top five esports with the largest prize pools, three have been MOBA titles for three years in row. Distributed prize money in MOBA tournaments reached over United States dollar|US$54 million in 2017. A year later, prize pools continued to grow reaching over US$60 million, 40% of the year's total esports prize pools. ''2018 League of Legends World Championship'' had the biggest prize pool out of all League of Legends esports championship finals, awarding almost $6.5 million.

MOBAs are some of the most watched games in the world. Major esports professional tournaments are held in venues that can hold tens of thousands of spectators and are streamed online to millions more. A strong fanbase has opened up the opportunity for sponsorship and advertising, eventually leading the genre to become a global cultural phenomenon.

A free-to-play business model, which is used by the largest MOBA titles, have contributed to the genre's overall popularity. Players are able to download and play AAA (video game industry)|AAA-quality games at no cost. These games are generating revenue by selling cosmetic elements, including skins, voice lines, customized mounts and announcers, but none of these give the functional gameplay advantages to the buyer. As of 2012, free-to-play MOBAs, such as ''League of Legends'', ''Dota 2'', ''Heroes of the Storm'', and ''Smite'' were among the most popular PC games. The success in the genre has helped convince many video game publishers to copy the free-to-play MOBA model. SuperData Research reported that the genre generated over $2.5 billion of revenue in 2017.

<!-- Cultural influence -->
Similar to fighting games, MOBAs offer a large number of Game balance|viable player characters for the player to choose from, each of which having distinctive abilities, strengths, and weaknesses. With such wide varieties available, players have numerous choices from which to find the character most aligned with their skills and preferences. One such figure commonly represented in MOBAs is Monkey King|Sun Wukong, a legendary mythical figure from 16th-century China. Examples of representation of Sun Wukong in MOBAs in the form of playable characters include "Wukong" in ''League of Legends'', Samuro's "Monkey King" Skin (computing)|skin (custom outfit/costume) in ''Heroes of the Storm'', and "Monkey King" in ''DotA 2.''

