By 2008, the popularity of ''DotA'' had attracted commercial attention. Since the format was tied to the ''Warcraft'' property, developers began to work on their own "''DOTA''-style" video games. A Adobe Flash|Flash web game, named ''Minions (video game)|Minions,'' was created by Kixeye|The Casual Collective in 2008. Gas Powered Games released the first stand-alone commercial title in the genre, ''Demigod (video game)|Demigod'' (2009). In late 2009, Riot Games' debut title ''League of Legends'' was released. It was initially designed by Steve Feak, one of the original creators of ''DotA: Allstars,'' who went on to apply many of the mechanics and lessons he learned from the mod. Riot began to refer to the game's genre as a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA). Also in 2009, IceFrog, who had continued to develop ''DotA: Allstars'', was hired by Valve Corporation|Valve, in order to design a sequel to the original map. The same year, Valve announced ''Dota 2'' and subsequently secured the franchise's intellectual property rights after being contested by Riot Games for the ''DotA'' trademark. In 2012, Activision Blizzard settled a trademark dispute with Valve over the usage of the ''DOTA'' name and announced their own standalone game which was eventually named ''Heroes of the Storm''. ''Dota 2'' was released in 2013, and was referred to by Valve as an "action real-time strategy" game. ''Heroes of the Storm'' was released in 2015, featuring hero characters from ''Warcraft III'' and other Blizzard's franchises. Blizzard Entertainment|Blizzard adopted their own personal dictation for their game's genre with "hero brawler", citing its focus on action.

<!-- MOBAs for mobile devices -->With the expansion of the smartphone market, numerous MOBA titles have been released for Mobile device|portable devices, such as ''Vainglory (video game)|Vainglory'' (2014), and ''Honor of Kings'' (2015). An international adaptation of ''Honor of Kings'' developed by TiMi Studios and published by Tencent Games for markets outside mainland China, rebranded as ''Arena of Valor'' (2016), was released in the western market in 2017. In 2021, the Pokémon series released its first MOBA game in ''Pokémon Unite''.

