The umbrella term "natural-language understanding" can be applied to a diverse set of computer applications, ranging from small, relatively simple tasks such as short commands issued to robots, to highly complex endeavors such as the full comprehension of newspaper articles or poetry passages. Many real-world applications fall between the two extremes, for instance Document classification|text classification for the automatic analysis of emails and their routing to a suitable department in a corporation does not require an in-depth understanding of the text, but needs to deal with a much larger vocabulary and more diverse syntax than the management of simple queries to database tables with fixed schemata.

Throughout the years various attempts at processing natural language or ''English-like'' sentences presented to computers have taken place at varying degrees of complexity. Some attempts have not resulted in systems with deep understanding, but have helped overall system usability. For example, Wayne Ratliff originally developed the ''Vulcan'' program with an English-like syntax to mimic the English speaking computer in Star Trek. Vulcan later became the dBase system whose easy-to-use syntax effectively launched the personal computer database industry. Systems with an easy to use or ''English like'' syntax are, however, quite distinct from systems that use a rich lexicon and include an internal knowledge representation and reasoning|representation (often as first order logic) of the semantics of natural language sentences.

Hence the breadth and depth of "understanding" aimed at by a system determine both the complexity of the system (and the implied challenges) and the types of applications it can deal with.  The "breadth" of a system is measured by the sizes of its vocabulary and grammar.  The "depth" is measured by the degree to which its understanding approximates that of a fluent native speaker.  At the narrowest and shallowest, ''English-like'' command interpreters require minimal complexity, but have a small range of applications.  Narrow but deep systems explore and model mechanisms of understanding, but they still have limited application.  Systems that attempt to understand the contents of a document such as a news release beyond simple keyword matching and to judge its suitability for a user are broader and require significant complexity, but they are still somewhat shallow.  Systems that are both very broad and very deep are beyond the current state of the art.

