According to the legend, each leader's Artificial intelligence in video games|game AI in ''Civilization (video game)|Civilization'' had a parameter that described their aggression on a scale from 1 to 10, with 1 being least aggressive and 10 most aggressive. Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi was the only leader in the game with the lowest possible aggression rating of 1 and, as a result, was only able to wage defensive wars. Once the AI changed its government form to democracy, which was preferred by peaceful nations such as India,

According to the legend, the aggression level was stored as an Integer (computer science)|8-bit unsigned integer variable that could only store values in the range from 0 to 255 (or ), and the negative value would therefore result in an integer overflow (specifically an integer underflow), with the value being stored as 255 others the developers were so amused by it that they deliberately re-implemented as an Easter egg (media)|Easter egg. According to Sid Meier, since all integer variables are Signed integer|signed by default in both C (programming language)|C and C++ (the programming languages of ''Civilization'' and ''Civilization II'' respectively), overflow would not have occurred if Gandhi's aggression were set to –1; moreover, the government form does not affect AI aggressiveness at all, so Gandhi's aggression level remained the same throughout the game.

File:Civilization V AI Chart.png|thumb|An artificial intelligence configuration of ''[[Civilization V''. Gandhi's high values of "Build Nuke" and "Use Nuke" favors are clearly visible]]
Gandhi is actually one of the most peaceful leaders in ''Civilization V'', but his artificial intelligence parameters that control building and using of nuclear weapons have the value of 12, which is the highest of any leader. The next three leaders have a value of 8, and most leaders have a value between 4 and 6.

''Civilization VI'' introduced a secret agenda mechanic that regulates the artificial intelligence behavior. Each leader has two agendas: the first is constant and based on each leader's personal history, and the second one (as well as a third one in ''Civilization VI: Gathering Storm'') is chosen randomly at the start of each game. Gandhi's fixed goal is "Peacekeeper": Gandhi is much less likely to start wars, and disdains civilizations that do, as well as appreciating those that do the opposite. However, he has a fixed 70% probability of getting "Nuke Happy" as his secondary agenda, which causes him to focus on building nukes, appreciate civilizations that do, and disdain civilizations that do not.

