In 1998, the release of the RIVA TNT solidified Nvidia's reputation for developing capable graphics adapters. In late 1999, Nvidia released the GeForce 256 (NV10), which was most notable for introducing on-board Transform, clipping, and lighting|transformation and lighting (T&L) to consumer-level 3D hardware. Running at 120&nbsp;MHz and featuring four-pixel pipelines, it implemented advanced video acceleration, motion compensation, and hardware sub-picture alpha blending. The GeForce outperformed existing products by a wide margin.

Due to the success of its products, Nvidia won the contract to develop the graphics hardware for Microsoft's Xbox (console)|Xbox game console, which earned Nvidia a $200 million advance. However, the project took many of its best engineers away from other projects. In the short term this did not matter, and the GeForce 2 Series|GeForce2 GTS shipped in the summer of 2000. In December 2000, Nvidia reached an agreement to acquire the intellectual assets of its one-time rival 3dfx Interactive|3dfx, a pioneer in consumer 3D graphics technology leading the field from the mid-1990s until 2000. The acquisition process was finalized in April 2002.

In July 2002, Nvidia acquired Exluna for an undisclosed sum. Exluna made software-rendering tools and the personnel were merged into the Cg project. In August 2003, Nvidia acquired MediaQ for approximately US$70 million. On April 22, 2004, Nvidia acquired iReady, also a provider of high-performance TCP/IP and iSCSI offload solutions. In December 2004, it was announced that Nvidia would assist Sony with the design of the graphics processor (RSX 'Reality Synthesizer'|RSX) in the PlayStation 3 game console. On December 14, 2005, Nvidia acquired Acer Laboratories Incorporated|ULI Electronics, which at the time supplied third-party Southbridge (computing)|southbridge parts for chipsets to ATI Technologies|ATI, Nvidia's competitor. In March 2006, Nvidia acquired Hybrid Graphics. In December 2006, Nvidia, along with its main rival in the graphics industry AMD (which had acquired ATI), received subpoenas from the United States Department of Justice|U.S. Department of Justice regarding possible United States antitrust law|antitrust violations in the graphics card industry.

''Forbes'' named Nvidia its ''Company of the Year'' for 2007, citing the accomplishments it made during the said period as well as during the previous five years. On January 5, 2007, Nvidia announced that it had completed the acquisition of PortalPlayer, Inc. In February 2008, Nvidia acquired Ageia, developer of the PhysX physics engine and physics processing unit. Nvidia announced that it planned to integrate the PhysX technology into its future GPU products.

In July 2008, Nvidia took a write-down of approximately $200 million on its first-quarter revenue, after reporting that certain mobile chipsets and GPUs produced by the company had "abnormal failure rates" due to manufacturing defects. Nvidia, however, did not reveal the affected products. In September 2008, Nvidia became the subject of a class action lawsuit over the defects, claiming that the faulty GPUs had been incorporated into certain laptop models manufactured by Apple Inc., Dell, and Hewlett-Packard|HP. In September 2010, Nvidia reached a settlement, in which it would reimburse owners of the affected laptops for repairs or, in some cases, replacement. On January 10, 2011, Nvidia signed a six-year, $1.5 billion cross-licensing agreement with Intel, ending all litigation between the two companies.

In November 2011, after initially unveiling it at Mobile World Congress, Nvidia released its Tegra 3 ARM architecture family|ARM system-on-chip|system on a chip for mobile devices. Nvidia claimed that the chip featured the first-ever quad-core mobile CPU. In May 2011, it was announced that Nvidia had agreed to acquire Icera, a baseband chip making company in the UK, for $367 million. In January 2013, Nvidia unveiled the Tegra 4, as well as the Shield Portable|Nvidia Shield, an Android (operating system)|Android-based handheld game console powered by the new system on a chip. On July 29, 2013, Nvidia announced that they acquired The Portland Group|PGI from STMicroelectronics.

In 2014, Nvidia ported the Valve games Portal (video game)|Portal and Half-Life 2|Half Life 2 to its Nvidia Shield tablet as Lightspeed Studio. Since 2014, Nvidia has diversified its business focusing on three markets: gaming, automotive electronics, and mobile devices.

On May 6, 2016, Nvidia unveiled the first GPUs of the GeForce 10 series, the GTX 1080 and 1070, based on the company's new Pascal microarchitecture|Pascal microarchitecture. Nvidia claimed that both models outperformed its Maxwell (microarchitecture)|Maxwell-based Titan X model; the models incorporate GDDR5X and GDDR5 memory respectively, and use a 16&nbsp;nm manufacturing process. The architecture also supports a new hardware feature known as simultaneous multi-projection (SMP), which is designed to improve the quality of multi-monitor and virtual reality rendering. Laptops that include these GPUs and are sufficiently thin&nbsp;– as of late 2017, under &nbsp;– have been designated as meeting NVIDIA's "Max-Q" design standard.

In July 2016, Nvidia agreed to a settlement for a false advertising lawsuit regarding its GTX 970 model, as the models were unable to use all of their advertised 4&nbsp;GB of RAM due to limitations brought by the design of its hardware. In May 2017, Nvidia announced a partnership with Toyota which will use Nvidia's Drive PX-series artificial intelligence platform for its autonomous vehicles. In July 2017, Nvidia and Chinese search giant Baidu announced a far-reaching AI partnership that includes cloud computing, autonomous driving, consumer devices, and Baidu's open-source AI framework PaddlePaddle. Baidu unveiled that Nvidia's Drive PX 2 AI will be the foundation of its autonomous-vehicle platform.

Nvidia officially released the Titan V on December 7, 2017.

Nvidia officially released the Nvidia Quadro GV100 on March 27, 2018. Nvidia officially released the RTX 2080 GPUs on September 27, 2018. In 2018, Google announced that Nvidia's Tesla P4 graphic cards would be integrated into Google Cloud service's artificial intelligence.

In May 2018, on the Nvidia user forum, a thread was started asking the company to update users when they would release web drivers for its cards installed on legacy Mac Pro machines up to Mac Pro#1st generation (tower)|mid-2012 5,1 running the macOS Mojave operating system 10.14. Device driver|Web drivers are required to enable graphics acceleration and multiple Computer monitor|display monitor capabilities of the Graphics processing unit|GPU. On its Mojave update info website, Apple stated that macOS Mojave would run on legacy machines with Metal (API)|'Metal compatible' graphics cards and listed Metal compatible GPUs, including some manufactured by Nvidia. However, this list did not include Metal compatible cards that currently work in macOS High Sierra using Nvidia-developed web drivers. In September, Nvidia responded, "Apple fully controls drivers for Mac OS. But if Apple allows, our engineers are ready and eager to help Apple deliver great drivers for Mac OS 10.14 (Mojave)." In October, Nvidia followed this up with another public announcement, "Apple fully controls drivers for Mac OS. Unfortunately, Nvidia currently cannot release a driver unless it is approved by Apple," suggesting a possible rift between the two companies. By January 2019, with still no sign of the enabling web drivers, Apple community#AppleInsider|Apple Insider weighed into the controversy with a claim that Apple management "doesn't want Nvidia support in macOS". The following month, Apple Insider followed this up with another claim that Nvidia support was abandoned because of "relational issues in the past", and that Apple was developing its own GPU technology. Without Apple-approved Nvidia web drivers, Apple users are faced with replacing their Nvidia cards with a competing supported brand, such as AMD Radeon from the list recommended by Apple.

File:Nvidia Yokneam Office.jpg|thumb|right|Nvidia Yokneam office (former [[Mellanox Technologies), Israel, March 2023]]
On March 11, 2019, Nvidia announced a deal to buy Mellanox Technologies for $6.9 billion to substantially expand its footprint in the high-performance computing market. In May 2019, Nvidia announced new RTX Studio laptops. The creators say that the new laptop is going to be seven times faster than a top-end MacBook Pro with a Core i9 and AMD's Radeon Pro Vega 20 graphics in apps like Autodesk Maya|Maya and RedCine-X Pro. In August 2019, Nvidia announced ''Minecraft RTX'', an official Nvidia-developed patch for the game ''Minecraft'' adding real-time DXR ray tracing exclusively to the Windows 10 version of the game. The whole game is, in Nvidia's words, "refit" with path tracing, which dramatically affects the way light, reflections, and shadows work inside the engine.

In May 2020, Nvidia's top scientists developed an open source|open-source ventilator to address the shortage resulting from the global COVID-19 pandemic|coronavirus pandemic. On May 14, 2020, Nvidia officially announced their Ampere GPU microarchitecture and the Nvidia A100 GPU accelerator. In July 2020, it was reported that Nvidia was in talks with SoftBank Group|SoftBank to buy Arm (company)|Arm, a UK-based chip designer, for $32 billion.

On September 1, 2020, Nvidia officially announced the GeForce 30 series based on the company's new Ampere (microarchitecture)|Ampere microarchitecture.

On September 13, 2020, it was announced that Nvidia would buy Arm from SoftBank Group for $40 billion, subject to the usual scrutiny, with the latter retaining a 10% share of Nvidia.

In October 2020, Nvidia announced its plan to build the most powerful computer in Cambridge, England. The computer, called Cambridge-1, launched in July 2021 with a $100 million investment and will employ AI to support Medical open network for AI|healthcare research. According to Jensen Huang, "The Cambridge-1 supercomputer will serve as a hub of innovation for the UK, and further the groundbreaking work being done by the nation's researchers in critical healthcare and drug discovery."

Also in October 2020, along with the release of Nvidia RTX A6000, Nvidia announced it is retiring its workstation GPU brand Quadro, shifting its product name to Nvidia RTX for future products and the manufacturing to be Ampere (microarchitecture)|Nvidia Ampere architecture based. In October 2021, the European Commission opened a competition investigation into the takeover. The Commission stated that Nvidia's acquisition could restrict competitors' access to Arm's products and provide Nvidia with too much internal information on its competitors due to their deals with Arm. SoftBank (the parent company of Arm) and Nvidia announced in early February 2022 that they "had agreed not to move forward with the transaction 'because of significant regulatory challenges'". The investigation is set to end on March 15, 2022. That same month, Nvidia was reportedly compromised by a cyberattack. The attack coincided with the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, though there is no indication that the attack came from Russia or Russian hackers.

In March 2022, Nvidia's CEO Jensen Huang mentioned that they are open to having Intel manufacture their chips in the future. This was the first time the company mentioned that they would work together with Intel's upcoming foundry services.

In April 2022, it was reported that Nvidia planned to open a new research center in Yerevan, Armenia.

In September 2022, Nvidia announced its next-generation automotive-grade chip, Nvidia Drive#DRIVE Thor|Drive Thor.

Following U.S. Department of Commerce regulations which placed an China–United States trade war#Biden administration restrictions|embargo on exports to China of advanced microchips, which went into effect in October 2022, Nvidia saw its data center chip added to the export control list. The next month, the company unveiled a new advanced chip in China, called the A800 GPU, that met the export control rules.

In September 2023, Getty Images announced that it was partnering with Nvidia to launch Generative AI by Getty Images, a new tool that lets people create images using Getty's library of licensed photos. Getty will use Nvidia's Edify model, which is available on Nvidia's generative AI model library Picasso.

On September 26, 2023, Denny's CEO Kelli Valade joined Huang in East San Jose to celebrate the founding of Nvidia at the Denny's on Berryessa Road, where a plaque was installed to mark the relevant corner booth.

In October 2023, it was reported that Nvidia had quietly begun designing ARM architecture family|ARM-based central processing units (CPUs) for Microsoft's Microsoft Windows|Windows operating system with a target to start selling them in 2025.

