Further|Removal of Sam Altman from OpenAI}}

On November 17, 2023, Sam Altman was removed as CEO based on the board (composed of Helen Toner, Ilya Sutskever, Adam D'Angelo and Tasha McCauley) citing a lack of confidence in him, with Chief Technology Officer Mira Murati taking over as interim CEO. Greg Brockman, the president of OpenAI, was removed as chairman of the board. Brockman resigned from the company's presidency shortly after the announcement, and reported some details of the events that occurred before he left. This was followed by the resignation of three senior OpenAI researchers: director of research and GPT-4 lead Jakub Pachocki, head of AI risk Aleksander Madry, and researcher Szymon Sidor.

On November 18, 2023, there reportedly were talks of Altman returning to his role as CEO amid pressure placed upon the board by investors such as Microsoft and Thrive Capital, who condemned Altman's departure. Although Altman himself spoke in favor of returning to OpenAI, he has stated that he was considering starting a new company and bringing former employees of OpenAI with him if talks do not work out. If Altman were to return, the members of the board agreed they would "in principle" resign from the company. On November 19, 2023, negotiations with Altman to return to the company failed and Murati was replaced by Emmett Shear to take over as interim CEO. The board initially contacted Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei who was a former executive at OpenAI to replace Altman and proposed a Mergers and acquisitions|merger, both offers were declined.

On November 20, 2023, Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella announced Altman and Brockman would be joining the company to lead a new research team regarding advanced AI, and state they are still committed to OpenAI despite the turn of events. The partnership had not been finalized as Altman gave the board another opportunity to negotiate with him. About 738 of OpenAI's 770 employees, including Murati and Sutskever, signed an open letter stating they would quit their jobs and join Microsoft if the board did not re-hire Altman as CEO and then resign. Investors considered taking legal action against the board members in response to potential mass resignations and Altman's removal. In response, OpenAI management sent an internal memo to employees stating that negotiations with Altman and the board are back in progress and will take some time.


On November 21, 2023, after continued negotiations, Altman and Brockman returned to the company in their prior roles along with a reconstructed board made up of new members Bret Taylor (as chairman) and Lawrence Summers, with D'Angelo remaining. On November 22, 2023, reports emerged suggesting that Sam Altman's dismissal from OpenAI may be linked to his alleged mishandling of a significant breakthrough in the organization's secretive project codenamed Q*. According to sources within OpenAI, Q* is aimed at developing AI capabilities in logical and mathematical reasoning, and reportedly involves performing math on the level of grade-school students. Concerns about Altman's response to this development, specifically regarding the potential safety implications of the discovery, were reportedly raised to the company's board shortly before his firing. On November 29, 2023, OpenAI announced that an anonymous employee from Microsoft joined the board as a non-voting member to observe the company's operations.


