In January 2023, OpenAI has been criticized for outsourcing the annotation of data sets including toxic content to Sama (company)|Sama, a company based in San Francisco but employing workers in Kenya. These annotations were used to train an AI model to detect toxicity, which could then be used to filter out toxic content, notably from ChatGPT's training data and outputs. But these pieces of text usually contained detailed descriptions of various types of violence, including sexual violence. The four Sama employees interviewed by ''Time (magazine)|Time'' described themselves as mentally scarred. OpenAI paid Sama $12.50 per hour of work, and Sama was redistributing the equivalent of between $1.32 and $2.00 per hour post-tax to its annotators. Sama's spokesperson said that the $12.50 was also covering other implicit costs, among which were infrastructure expenses, quality assurance and management.

In March 2023, the company was also criticized for disclosing particularly few technical details about products like GPT-4, which goes against its initial commitment to openness and makes it harder for independent researchers to replicate its work and to develop safeguards. OpenAI justified this strategic turn by competitiveness and safety reasons. OpenAI's chief scientist Ilya Sutskever argued in 2023 that open-sourcing increasingly capable models is increasingly risky, expecting that the safety reasons for not open-sourcing the most potent AI models will be "obvious" in a few years.

OpenAI has been sued for copyright infringement by authors Sarah Silverman, Matthew Butterick, Paul G. Tremblay|Paul Tremblay and Mona Awad in July 2023. The ''New York Times'' has also envisaged a lawsuit which it followed through with in late December 2023. In September 2023, 17 authors, including George R. R. Martin, John Grisham, Jodi Picoult and Jonathan Franzen, joined the Authors Guild in filing a class action lawsuit against OpenAI, alleging that the company's technology was illegally using their copyrighted work.

OpenAI has been sued for violating EU General Data Protection Regulations in August 2023. In April 2023, the EU's European Data Protection Board (EDPB) formed a dedicated task force on ChatGPT "to foster cooperation and to exchange information on possible enforcement actions conducted by data protection authorities" based on the "enforcement action undertaken by the Italian data protection authority against Open AI about the Chat GPT service". 

In Nov 2023, OpenAI's leadership and its LLMs were accused of dehumanizing Palestinians.

