Having the ability to look at a patient on an individual basis will allow for a more accurate diagnosis and specific treatment plan. Genotyping is the process of obtaining an individual's DNA sequence by using biological assays. By having a detailed account of an individual's DNA sequence, their genome can then be compared to a reference genome, like that of the Human Genome Project, to assess the existing genetic variations that can account for possible diseases. A number of private companies, such as 23andMe, Navigenics, and Illumina (company)|Illumina, have created Direct-to-Consumer genome sequencing accessible to the public. Often, drugs are prescribed with the idea that it will work relatively the same for everyone, but in the application of drugs, there are a number of factors that must be considered. The detailed account of genetic information from the individual will help prevent adverse events, allow for appropriate dosages, and create maximum efficacy with drug prescriptions. physicians can use patients' gene profile to prescribe optimum doses of warfarin to prevent side effects such as major bleeding and to allow sooner and better therapeutic efficacy.

An aspect of a theranostic platform applied to personalized medicine can be the use of diagnostic tests to guide therapy.  The tests may involve medical imaging such as MRI contrast agents (T1 and T2 agents), fluorescent markers (organic dyes and inorganic quantum dots), and nuclear imaging agents (PET radiotracers or SPECT agents). or in vitro lab test including DNA sequencing and often involve deep learning algorithms that weigh the result of testing for several biomarkers.

In addition to specific treatment, personalised medicine can greatly aid the advancements of preventive care. For instance, many women are already being genotyped for certain mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene if they are predisposed because of a family history of breast cancer or ovarian cancer. As more causes of diseases are mapped out according to mutations that exist within a genome, the easier they can be identified in an individual. Measures can then be taken to prevent a disease from developing. Even if mutations were found within a genome, having the details of their DNA can reduce the impact or delay the onset of certain diseases. These companion diagnostics have incorporated the pharmacogenomic information related to the drug into their prescription label in an effort to assist in making the most optimal treatment decision possible for the patient. In addition, drugs that are deemed ineffective for the larger population can gain approval by the FDA by using personal genomes to qualify the effectiveness and need for that specific drug or therapy even though it may only be needed by a small percentage of the population.,

Physicians commonly use a trial and error strategy until they find the treatment therapy that is most effective for their patient. Such an approach would also be more cost-effective and accurate. Women are now genotyped for these specific mutations to select the most effective treatment.

Screening for these mutations is carried out via high-throughput screening or phenotypic screening. Several drug discovery and Pharmaceutical Company|pharmaceutical companies are currently utilizing these technologies to not only advance the study of personalised medicine, but also to amplify Genetics|genetic research. Alternative Biological target|multi-target approaches to the traditional approach of Transfection|"forward" transfection DNA library|library screening can entail reverse transfection or chemogenomics.

Pharmacy compounding is another application of personalised medicine. Though not necessarily using genetic information, the customized production of a drug whose various properties (e.g. dose level, ingredient selection, route of administration, etc.) are selected and crafted for an individual patient is accepted as an area of personalised medicine (in contrast to mass-produced unit doses or fixed-dose combination|fixed-dose combinations). Computational and mathematical approaches for predicting drug interactions are also being developed. For example, phenotypic response surfaces model the relationships between drugs, their interactions, and an individual's biomarkers.

One active area of research is efficiently delivering personalized drugs generated from pharmacy compounding to the disease sites of the body. Several candidate nanocarriers are being investigated, such as iron oxide nanoparticles, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, Colloidal gold|gold nanoparticles, and silica nanoparticles. Despite the great potential of this nanoparticle-based drug delivery system, the significant progress in the field is yet to be made, and the nanocarriers are still being investigated and modified to meet clinical standards. The term is a portmanteau of "therapeutics" and "diagnostics". It is most commonly applied where radionuclides (either gamma or positron emitters) are attached to molecules for SPECT or PET imaging, or Electron emission|electron emitters for radiotherapy. One of the earliest examples is the use of radioactive iodine for treatment of people with prostate cancer|prostate or thyroid cancer.

