Thiel is a member of the Republican Party (United States)|Republican Party. He contributes to both Libertarian Party (United States)|Libertarian and Republican candidates and causes.

File:Peter Thiel 2016 RNC (1) (cropped).jpg|thumb|right|Thiel speaking at the [[2016 Republican National Convention]]
In December 2007, Thiel endorsed Ron Paul for Ron Paul presidential campaign, 2008|President. After Paul failed to secure the Republican nomination, Thiel contributed to the John McCain John McCain 2008 presidential campaign|campaign.

In 2010, Thiel supported Meg Whitman in her unsuccessful bid for the California gubernatorial election, 2010|governorship of California. He contributed the maximum allowable $25,900 to the Whitman campaign.

In 2012, Thiel, along with Nosek and Scott Banister, put their support behind the Endorse Liberty Super PAC. Collectively they gave $3.9 million to Endorse Liberty, whose purpose was to promote Ron Paul. As of 31 January 2012, Endorse Liberty reported spending about $3.3 million promoting Paul by setting up two YouTube channels, buying ads from Google, Facebook and StumbleUpon, and building a presence on the Web. After Paul again failed to secure the nomination, Thiel contributed to the Mitt Romney/Paul Ryan 2012 Mitt Romney presidential campaign|presidential ticket of 2012. After Fiorina dropped out, Thiel supported Donald Trump and became one of the California delegates for Trump's nomination. He was a headline speaker during the convention, during which he announced that he was "proud to be gay," for which the assembled Republicans cheered. On 15 October 2016, Thiel announced a $1.25 million donation in support of Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016|Donald Trump's presidential campaign. Thiel stated to ''The New York Times'': "I didn't give him any money for a long time because I didn't think it mattered, and then the campaign asked me to." After Trump's victory, Thiel was named to the executive committee of the President-elect's Presidential transition of Donald Trump#Transition team|transition team.

Thiel also has his own political-action committee, Free Forever, which is committed to supporting political candidates who support stricter border control, restrictive immigration policy, funds for veterans, and anti-interventionist foreign policy, among other things.

By February 2022, Thiel was one of the largest donors to Republican candidates in the 2022 election campaign with more than $20.4 million in contributions. He supported 16 senatorial and congressional candidates, several of whom were proponents of the Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election|falsehood that there was significant voter fraud in the 2020 United States presidential election|2020 election. Two of said senatorial candidates (Blake Masters and J. D. Vance) were also tech investors who had previously worked for Thiel.

In 2023, Barton Gellman of ''The Atlantic'' wrote that Thiel "has lost interest in democracy" and that "he wouldn’t be giving money to any politician, including Donald Trump, in the next presidential campaign".

