The words "mind" and "consciousness" are used by different communities in different ways. Some new age thinkers, for example, use the word "consciousness" to describe something similar to Bergson's "élan vital": an invisible, energetic fluid that permeates life and especially the mind. Science fiction writers use the word to describe some essentialism|essential property that makes us human: a machine or alien that is "conscious" will be presented as a fully human character, with intelligence, desires, Will (philosophy)|will, insight, pride and so on. (Science fiction writers also use the words "sentience", "sapience", "self-awareness" or "ghost"—as in the ''Ghost in the Shell'' manga and anime series—to describe this essential human property). For others , the words "mind" or "consciousness" are used as a kind of secular synonym for the soul.

For philosophy|philosophers, neuroscientists and cognitive science|cognitive scientists, the words are used in a way that is both more precise and more mundane: they refer to the familiar, everyday experience of having a "thought in your head", like a perception, a dream, an intention or a plan, and to the way we ''see'' something, ''know'' something, ''mean'' something or ''understand'' something. "It's not hard to give a commonsense definition of consciousness" observes philosopher John Searle. What is mysterious and fascinating is not so much ''what'' it is but ''how'' it is: how does a lump of fatty tissue and electricity give rise to this (familiar) experience of perceiving, meaning or thinking?

Philosophers call this the hard problem of consciousness. It is the latest version of a classic problem in the philosophy of mind called the "mind-body problem". A related problem is the problem of ''meaning'' or ''understanding'' (which philosophers call "intentionality"): what is the connection between our ''thoughts'' and ''what we are thinking about'' (i.e. objects and situations out in the world)? A third issue is the problem of ''experience'' (or "Phenomenology (philosophy)|phenomenology"): If two people see the same thing, do they have the same experience? Or are there things "inside their head" (called "qualia") that can be different from person to person?

Neurobiologists believe all these problems will be solved as we begin to identify the neural correlates of consciousness: the actual relationship between the machinery in our heads and its collective properties; such as the mind, experience and understanding. Some of the harshest critics of artificial intelligence agree that the brain is just a machine, and that consciousness and intelligence are the result of physical processes in the brain. The difficult philosophical question is this: can a computer program, running on a digital machine that shuffles the binary digits of zero and one, duplicate the ability of the neural correlates of consciousness|neurons to create minds, with mental states (like understanding or perceiving), and ultimately, the experience of consciousness?

