In the 1st century, the use of the Latin word  (literally "kidnapper") to denote stealing someone else's creative work was pioneered by the Roman poet Martial, who complained that another poet had "kidnapped his verses". ''Plagiary'', a derivative of ''plagiarus'', was introduced into English in 1601 by dramatist Ben Jonson during the Jacobean Era to describe someone guilty of literary theft. The derived form ''plagiarism'' was introduced into English around 1620. The Latin words  ("kidnapper") and  ("kidnapping") have the same root'': plaga'' ("snare", "net"), which is based on the Proto-Indo-European root|Indo-European root ''*-plak'', "to weave".

It is frequently claimed that people in antiquity had no concept of plagiarism, or at least did not condemn it, and that it only came to be seen as immoral much later, anywhere from the Age of Enlightenment in the 17th century to the Romantic movement in the 18th century. Although people in antiquity found detecting plagiarism difficult due to long travel times and scarcity of literate persons, there are a considerable number of pre-Age of Enlightenment|Enlightenment authors who accused others of plagiarism and considered it distasteful and scandalous, including historians Polybius and Pliny the Elder. The 3rd century Greek work ''Lives of the Eminent Philosophers'' mentions that Heraclides Ponticus was accused of plagiarizing () a treatise on Heliod and Homer. In Vitruvius's 7th book, he acknowledged his debt to earlier writers and attributed them, and he also included a strong condemnation of plagiarism: "Earlier writers deserve our thanks, those, on the contrary, deserve our reproaches, who steal the writings of such men and publish them as their own. Those, who depend in their writings, not on their own ideas, but who enviously do wrong to the works of others and boast of it, deserve not merely to be blamed, but to be sentenced to actual punishment for their wicked course of life." Vitruvius went on to claim that "such things did not pass without strict chastisement".

