The bioethical debate regarding genetic modification in food and humans has many arguments for and against. In the UK, 4% of the half a million children born have life-affecting genetic defects. This includes genetic diseases that can lead to early death, long-term mental issues, or a lifetime of debilitating physical health problems. Many scientists and supporters of genetic modification argue that DNA is not sacred, and is in fact just chemical sequences in an organism. DNA down to the microscope is just atoms made of elements just like any other living or non-living matter. The University of Pennsylvania in 2016 used mice with a genetic liver disease and were able to genetically edit the mice at birth so that they did not have this deadly disease. A beaver building a dam is considered natural, a bird building a nest is also considered natural, so therefore the activities of humans are also natural and a result of autonomy and free will. Google's cat experiment involved a network of computers, which learned the concept of a cat despite the fact it had never been told the semantics of what a cat was nor even syntax. Semantics and syntax are important factors regarding artificial intelligence because there is a debate over whether machines are purely syntax and just inserted algorithms and codes that require human activity for them to work. Some fear that syntax will evolve into semantics over time and that machines will learn to have feelings and behaviours similar to that of a human. There is a theory that evolvable matter something considered dead or without emotions is capable of coming to life.<ref name=":6" /> This theory hypothesises that non-carbon life could possibly follow the same rules of evolution as humans or any other organism however this has not been tested and is only an idea thus far. There are also many who fear that artificial intelligence will allow for human body modification where parts will be accessible such as a new arm or leg for certain purposes. However, those who support artificial intelligence will argue this is a benefit for society because people with organ diseases, for example, will be able to have a new kidney or liver and prosthetic limbs already exist and are widely used by amputees or people born without a limb.<ref name=":6" /> The main consensus amongst the anti-artificial intelligence idea is that the more powerful it becomes, the more powerless we are to control it.<ref name=":3" /> Those in favour argue that it is there to aid us and it is not necessary for it to eclipse humanity's intelligence and ability.

