The Council of Europe (CoE) is an international organization which promotes human rights, democracy and the rule of law. It comprises 47 member states, including all 29 Signatories of the European Union's 2018 Declaration of Cooperation on Artificial Intelligence. The CoE has created a common legal space in which the members have a legal obligation to guarantee rights as set out in the European Convention on Human Rights. Specifically in relation to AI, "The Council of Europe's aim is to identify intersecting areas between AI and our standards on human rights, democracy and rule of law, and to develop relevant standard setting or capacity-building solutions". The large number of relevant documents identified by the CoE include guidelines, charters, papers, reports and strategies. The authoring bodies of these AI regulation documents are not confined to one sector of society and include organizations, companies, bodies and nation-states. Digital Services Act, the Digital Markets Act. For AI in particular, the Artificial Intelligence Act|Artificial intelligence Act is regarded in 2023 as the most far-reaching regulation of AI worldwide.

Most European Union (EU) countries have their own national strategies towards regulating AI, but these are largely convergent. supported by a High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. In April 2019, the European Commission published its ''Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI)'', The EU Commission's High Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence carries out work on Trustworthy AI, and the Commission has issued reports on the Safety and Liability Aspects of AI and on the Ethics of Automated Vehicles. In 2020. the EU Commission sought views on a proposal for AI specific legislation, and that process is ongoing. The White Paper consists of two main building blocks, an 'ecosystem of excellence' and a 'ecosystem of trust'. The 'ecosystem of trust' outlines the EU's approach for a regulatory framework for AI. In its proposed approach, the Commission distinguishes AI applications based on whether they are 'high-risk' or not. Only high-risk AI applications should be in the scope of a future EU regulatory framework. An AI application is considered high-risk if it operates in a risky sector (such as healthcare, transport or energy) and is "used in such a manner that significant risks are likely to arise". For high-risk AI applications, the requirements are mainly about the : "training data", "data and record-keeping", "information to be provided", "robustness and accuracy", and "human oversight". There are also requirements specific to certain usages such as remote biometric identification. AI applications that do not qualify as 'high-risk' could be governed by a voluntary labeling scheme. As regards compliance and enforcement, the Commission considers prior conformity assessments which could include 'procedures for testing, inspection or certification' and/or 'checks of the algorithms and of the data sets used in the development phase'. A European governance structure on AI in the form of a framework for cooperation of national competent authorities could facilitate the implementation of the regulatory framework. A January 2021 draft was leaked online on April 14, 2021, before the Commission ultimately presented their official "Proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act)" a week later. Shortly after, the Artificial Intelligence Act was formally proposed. This includes a fine-tune of the 2020 risk-based approach with, this time, 4 risk categories: "minimal", "limited", high" and "unacceptable". The proposal has been severely critiqued in the public debate. Academics are concerned about the various unclear elements in the proposal – such as the broad definition of what constitutes AI – and fear unintended legal implications, especially for vulnerable groups such as patients and migrants. A subsequent version of the AI Act was adopted by the European parliament on June 14, 2023. The AI Act is expected to come into effect in late 2025 or early 2026.

Observers have expressed concerns about the multiplication of legislative proposals under the von der Leyen Commission. The speed of the legislative initiatives is partially led by political ambitions of the EU and could put at risk the digital rights of the European citizens, including rights to privacy, especially in the face of uncertain guarantees of data protection through cyber security. and the concept of digital sovereignty.

