Tiger Global Management and Sequoia Capital had attempted to reinstate Altman, according to ''The Information (website)|The Information''; Bloomberg News reported that Microsoft and Thrive Capital were seeking for Altman's reinstatement. On November 18, ''The Verge'' reported that OpenAI's board of directors discussed reinstating Altman. The board agreed in principle to resign and to allow Altman to return, but missed the deadline. According to ''The Verge'', Altman was ambivalent about returning and would seek significant changes to the company, including replacing the board. A list of directors had been prepared by investors in the event that the board steps down, and purportedly includeed former Salesforce executive Bret Taylor.

On November 19, Altman and Brockman appeared at OpenAI's headquarters to negotiate, mediated by Nadella. According to Bloomberg News, Murati, Kwon, and chief operating officer Brad Lightcap were pushing for a new board of directors; it was required that the board absolve him of wrongdoing in order for Altman to be reinstated. Taylor was expected be a member of the new board and Microsoft had also attempted to gain a seat. ''The Wall Street Journal'' reported that Airbnb chief executive Brian Chesky and businesswoman Laurene Powell Jobs were also considered. Murati had intended to rehire Altman and Brockman, discussing the move with Adam D'Angelo. ''The Verge'' reported that Altman intended to return to OpenAI with support from Sutskever.

The board chose to name former Twitch (service)|Twitch chief executive Emmett Shear—who has ties to Effective altruism|effective altruist movement—as OpenAI's chief executive instead of reinstating Altman. Anthropic chief executive Dario Amodei refused to negotiate a deal that could have led to a merge of the two companies. In response, Microsoft appointed Altman as the chief executive of an artificial intelligence research team, joined by Brockman, Pachocki, Sidor, and Madry. Shear expressed interest in commercializing OpenAI with the board's support and stated his intentions to begin an investigation into Altman's removal.

Dozens of employees announced their resignations in response to Shear's accession. The next day, a letter signed by 745 of OpenAI's 770 employees threatened mass resignations if the board does not resign; among the signatories was board member Sutskever, who defected from the board and publicly apologized for his participation in the board's previous actions. On November 21, ''The Verge'' reported that Altman was reinstated with Taylor, D'Angelo, and economist Lawrence Summers on an interim board. Taylor will chair the board. As part of the compromise deal, Altman and Brockman will not reclaim seats on the board. Altman agreed to an internal investigation into his alleged conduct, selecting two lawyers from Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr|WilmerHale to conduct the inquiry.

