The documentary is a blend of archival footage and new interviews with Bourdain's friends, family, and coworkers. It covers Bourdain's rise from chef, to best selling author of the memoir ''Kitchen Confidential (book)|Kitchen Confidential'', to a world famous television presenter of food and travel shows.

As Bourdain traveled the globe, he developed a greater awareness of the hardships many people face in war zones, disaster areas, developing country|developing countries, and least developed countries. Director and producer Tom Vitale remembers the most difficult trip was to the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the first season of ''Anthony Bourdain: Parts Unknown''.

Bourdain is remembered by those who knew him as charismatic and hardworking, yet also prone to moodiness and obsessive behavior. His frequent travel for work led to the end of both his marriages, first to Nancy Putkoski and then Ottavia Busia. His career also kept him from being a regular presence in the life of his daughter, Ariane Busia-Bourdain. David Chang, a friend and fellow chef, recalls how Bourdain hid his dark side behind a happy façade. Chang believes Bourdain never fully addressed personal issues that led to a past heroin addiction. Friend, artist, and fellow addict, David Choe, theorizes that Bourdain replaced heroin with a work addiction.

After Bourdain's marriage to Busia ended, his mental health declined. He questioned what his life's direction should be, and joked more frequently about death. He began dating actress Asia Argento, and threw himself entirely into the relationship. His insistence that Argento be a guest director on ''Parts Unknown'' alienated long-time crew members. Busia recalls that Bourdain distanced himself from her and Ariane. Chang was especially hurt when Bourdain claimed Chang would never be a good father. When Argento revealed that she had been raped by Harvey Weinstein, Bourdain supported the MeToo movement nearly to the point of militancy. ''Parts Unknown'' director, Morgan Fallon, thinks Argento may have pulled away from the relationship due to Bourdain's intense personality.

While filming in Alsace | Alsace, France, Bourdain was distraught over a tabloid story about Argento being seen with another man. Bourdain died by suicide after hanging himself in his hotel room. The public turned Les Halles, a restaurant where Bourdain formerly worked, into a shrine of notes and flowers. Bourdain's friends, family, and coworkers reflect on their personal reactions to his suicide and their lingering grief. Choe defaces a mural of Bourdain because he believes Bourdain would have loved the act of rebellion.

