On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 91% based on 150 reviews, with an average rating of 7.8/10. The website's critics' consensus reads, "An emotionally raw and respectful portrait of Anthony Bourdain, ''Roadrunner'' marks another unflinchingly honest documentary from director Morgan Neville." On Metacritic, the film holds a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 39 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Audiences surveyed by PostTrak gave the film a 94% positive score, with 61% saying they would definitely recommend it. Richard Roeper, writing for the ''Chicago Sun-Times'', gave the film a score of 3.5 stars out of 4 and said that the film is an "insightful and exhilarating and profound and sometimes deeply sad documentary".

Daniel Fienberg, writing for ''The Hollywood Reporter'', described the film as being "an intensely painful documentary, one closer to the center of a raw, thoroughly unhealed, and yet very public, wound than I think I’ve ever seen before", concluding: "I’m much more comfortable with ''Roadrunner'' as a portrait of an evolving, complicated, tragic TV personality … than I am with it as an attempt to make sense of a man who, for whatever reason, no longer wanted to continue living."

Writing for ''RogerEbert.com'', Brian Tallerico gave the film a score of 3.5 stars out of 4, saying that the film is "a fascinating, moving documentary that transcends mere profile piece to reclaim a legacy, and it’s as inspirational as its subject" and that it "never feels like it’s invading the privacy of a very public figure, revealing how much can be learned about the man and why he mattered largely through what he chose to show us, not through some sort of series of personal revelations", but added that "Neville ... does seem to step back during the darker final year of Bourdain's life." Tallerico concluded: "The best thing I can say about “Roadrunner” is that it has the same impact of Bourdain’s best work. ... It may be a story about a tragic death but it is as life-affirming as anything I’ve seen this year."

Writing for Collider (website)|''Collider'', Matt Goldberg was more critical of the film, giving it a grade of C- and saying: "as the movie nears its conclusion, Neville makes the horrendous mistake of trying to "answer" Bourdain’s suicide when there’s no answer to be found, nor would finding an answer make any difference", adding that the film "no longer feels like an attempt to understand a complex individual, but rather an attempt from production company CNN Films to salvage a successful CNN show from a narrative it couldn’t handle." He concluded: "There are some moments of insight, and it’s nice to have his loved ones sing the praises of a man who was widely admired, but in its worst moments, ''Roadrunner'' feels like a network’s spin for its valuable travel shows rather than an honest attempt to grapple with a difficult legacy."

