To develop an efficacious test, Baron-Cohen ''et al.'' modified the puppet play paradigm of Wimmer and :de:Josef Perner|Perner (1983), in which puppets represent tangible characters in a story, rather than hypothetical characters of pure storytelling. 

In the test process, after introducing the dolls, the child is asked the control question of recalling their names (the ''Naming Question''). A short skit is then enacted; Sally takes a marble and hides it in her basket. She then "leaves" the room and goes for a walk. While she is away, Anne takes the marble out of Sally's basket and puts it in her own box. Sally is then reintroduced and the child is asked the key question, the ''Belief Question'': "Where will Sally look for her marble?"

In the Baron-Cohen ''et al.'' (1985) study, 23 of the 27 clinically unimpaired children (85%) and 12 of the 14 children with Down Syndrome (86%) answered the ''Belief Question'' correctly. However, only four of the 20 children with Autism (20%) answered correctly. Overall, children under the age of four, along with most autistic children (of older ages), answered the ''Belief Question'' with "Anne's box", seemingly unaware that Sally does not know her marble has been moved.

Ruffman, Garnham, and Rideout (2001) further investigated links between the Sally–Anne test and autism in terms of eye gaze as a social communicative function. They added a third possible location for the marble: the pocket of the investigator.  When autistic children and children with moderate learning disabilities were tested in this format, they found that both groups answered the Belief Question equally well; however, participants with moderate learning disabilities reliably looked at the correct location of the marble, while autistic participants did not, ''even if'' the autistic participant answered the question correctly. These results may be an expression of the social deficits relevant to autism.

Helen Tager-Flusberg|Tager-Flusberg (2007) states that in spite of the empirical findings with the Sally–Anne task, there is a growing uncertainty among scientists about the importance of the underlying theory-of-mind hypothesis of autism. In all studies that have been done, some children with autism pass false-belief tasks such as Sally–Anne.

