In 2005, at the age of 19, Altman co-founded Loopt, a location-based social networking service|social networking mobile application. As CEO, Altman raised more than $30million in venture capital for the company; however, Loopt failed to gain traction with enough users. In March 2012, it was acquired by the Green Dot Corporation for $43.4million. The following month, Altman co-founded Hydrazine Capital with his brother, Jack Altman.

Altman became a partner at Y Combinator, a startup accelerator that invests in a wide range of startups, in 2011, initially working there on a part-time basis. In February 2014, Altman was named president of YCombinator by its co-founder, Paul Graham (computer programmer)|Paul Graham. In a 2014 blog post, Altman said that the total valuation of YCombinator companies had surpassed $65billion, including Airbnb, Dropbox (service)|Dropbox, Zenefits, and Stripe (company)|Stripe. In September 2016, Altman announced his expanded role as president of YCGroup, which included YCombinator and other units. Altman said that he hoped to expand YCombinator to fund 1,000 new companies per year. He also tried to expand the types of companies funded by YC, especially "hard technology" companies. In October 2015, Altman announced YCContinuity, a $700million equity fund investing in YCcompanies as they matured. A week earlier, Altman had introduced YCombinator Research, a non-profit research lab, and donated $10million to fund it. YC Research has thus far announced research on basic income, the future of computing, education, and building new cities. In March 2019, YCannounced Altman's transition from the president of the company to a less hands-on role as Chairman of the Board, for him to focus on OpenAI. This decision came shortly after YC announced it would be moving its headquarters to San Francisco. As of early 2020, he was no longer affiliated with YC.

Altman co-founded Tools For Humanity in 2019, a company which builds and distributes systems designed to scan people's eyes to provide authentication and verify proof of personhood to counter fraud. People who agree to have their eyes scanned are compensated with a cryptocurrency called Worldcoin. Tools For Humanity describes its cryptocurrency as similar to universal basic income.

Altman has several other investments. Including, "Humane", the world's first wearable computer powered by AI, "Retro Biosciences", a research company aiming to extend human life by 10 years, and "Helion Energy", an American fusion research company.

