The mechanisms for modular or object-oriented programming that are provided by a programming language are mechanisms that allow developers to provide SoC.  For example, object-oriented programming languages such as C Sharp (programming language)|C#, C++, Delphi (programming language)|Delphi, and Java (programming language)|Java can separate concerns into Object (computer science)|objects, and architectural Design pattern (computer science)|design patterns like model–view–controller|MVC or model–view–presenter|MVP can separation of content and presentation|separate presentation and the data-processing (model) from content. Service-orientation|Service-oriented design can separate concerns into Service (Systems Architecture)|services. Procedural programming languages such as C (programming language)|C and Pascal (programming language)|Pascal can separate concerns into procedure (computer science)|procedures or Subroutines|functions. Aspect-oriented programming languages can separate concerns into aspect (computer science)|aspects and Object (computer science)|objects.

Separation of concerns is an important design principle in many other areas as well, such as urban planning, architecture and information design. The goal is to more effectively understand, design, and manage complex interdependent systems, so that functions can be reused, optimized independently of other functions, and insulated from the potential failure of other functions.

Common examples include separating a space into rooms, so that activity in one room does not affect people in other rooms, and keeping the stove on one circuit and the lights on another, so that overload by the stove does not turn the lights off. The example with rooms shows encapsulation, where information inside one room, such as how messy it is, is not available to the other rooms, except through the interface, which is the door. The example with circuits demonstrates that activity inside one module, which is a circuit with consumers of electricity attached, does not affect activity in a different module, so each module is not concerned with what happens in the other.

