The Vietnam War (1955–1975) was an important issue on college campuses across the United States in the 1960s and 1970s. As a belated response to Opposition to the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War|Vietnam War protesters who believed that funding from the DARPA|Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) made the university part of the military–industrial complex, the Stanford Research Institute split from Stanford University in 1970. The organization subsequently changed its name from the Stanford Research Institute to SRI International in 1977.

File:SRI International 122.17480W 37.png|thumb|right|Aerial image of SRI's Menlo Park campus
In 1972, physicists Harold E. Puthoff and Russell Targ undertook a series of investigations of psychic phenomena sponsored by the Central Intelligence Agency|CIA, for which they coined the term remote viewing. Among other activities, the project encompassed the work of consulting "consciousness researchers" including artist/writer Ingo Swann, military intelligence officer Joseph McMoneagle, and psychic/illusionist Uri Geller.  This Extrasensory perception|ESP work continued with funding from the US intelligence community until Puthoff and Targ left SRI in the mid-1980s. For more information, see Parapsychology research at SRI.

Social scientist and consumer futurist Arnold Mitchell created the VALS|Values, Attitudes and Lifestyles (VALS) psychographic methodology in the late 1970s to explain changing U.S. values and lifestyles. VALS was formally inaugurated as an SRI product in 1978 and was called "one of the ten top market research breakthroughs of the 1980s" by ''Advertising Age'' magazine.

Throughout the 1980s, SRI developed Zylon, Stealth technology|stealth technologies, improvements to ultrasound imaging, and many-sorted logic. In computing and software, SRI developed a multimedia electronic mail system, a theory of Non-interference (security)|non-interference in computer security, a multilevel security|multilevel secure (MLS) relational database system called Seaview, Open Agent Architecture (OAA), a network intrusion detection system, the Maude system, a declarative software language, and PacketHop, a peer-to-peer wireless technology to create scalable ad hoc networks.  SRI's research in network intrusion detection led to the patent infringement case ''SRI International, Inc. v. Internet Security Systems, Inc.'' The AI center's robotics research led to Shakey's successor, Flakey the robot, which focused on fuzzy logic.

In 1986, SRI.com became the List of the oldest currently-registered Internet domain names|8th registered ".com" domain.  The Artificial Intelligence Center developed the Procedural reasoning system|Procedural Reasoning System (PRS) in the late 1980s and into the early 1990s.  PRS launched the field of belief–desire–intention software model|BDI-based intelligent agents.  In the 1990s, SRI developed a letter sorting system for the United States Postal Service and several education and economic studies.

Military-related technologies developed by SRI in the 1990s and 2000s include Synthetic aperture radar#Ultra-wideband SAR|ground- and foliage-penetrating radar, the INCON and REDDE command and control system for the U.S. military, and IGRS (integrated GPS radio system)—an advanced military personnel and vehicle tracking system. To train armored combat units during battle exercises, SRI developed the Deployable Force-on-Force Instrumented Range System (DFIRST), which uses GPS satellites, high-speed wireless communications, and digital terrain map displays.

SRI created the Centibots in 2003, one of the first and largest teams of coordinated, autonomous mobile robots that explore, map, and survey unknown environments. It also created BotHunter, a free utility for Unix, which detects botnet activity within a network.

File:IraqCommPack.gif|thumb|left|The IraqComm system
With DARPA-funded research, SRI contributed to the development of speech recognition and Machine translation|translation products and was an active participant in DARPA's Global Autonomous Language Exploitation (GALE) program.  SRI also created translation software for use in the IraqComm, a device which allows two-way, speech-to-speech machine translation between English and colloquial Iraqi Arabic.

In medicine and chemistry, SRI developed dry powder inhaler|dry-powder drugs, laser photocoagulation (a treatment for some eye maladies), remote surgery (also known as telerobotic surgery), bio-agent detection using upconverting phosphor technology, the experimental anticancer drugs Tirapazamine and TAS-108, ammonium dinitramide (an environmentally benign oxidizer for safe and cost-effective disposal of hazardous materials), the electroactive polymer ("artificial muscle"), new uses for diamagnetic levitation, and the antimalarial drug Halofantrine.

SRI performed a study in the 1990s for Whirlpool Corporation that led to modern self-cleaning ovens.  In the 2000s,  SRI worked on Pathway Tools software for use in bioinformatics and systems biology to accelerate drug discovery using artificial intelligence and symbolic computing techniques.  The software system generates the BioCyc database collection, SRI's growing collection of genomic databases used by biologists to visualize genes within a chromosome, complete biochemical pathways, and full metabolic maps of organisms.

