File:SRI Air Pollution study 1949.jpg|thumb|right|SRI participant Paul Magill discussing the smog on Black Friday in Los Angeles at the first [[National Air Pollution Symposium in 1949]]
SRI's first research project investigated whether the Parthenium argentatum|guayule plant could be used as a source of natural rubber. During World War II, rubber was imported into the U.S. and was subject to shortages and strict rationing. In 1948, SRI began research and consultation with Chevron Corporation to develop an artificial substitute for tallow and coconut oil in soap production; SRI's investigation confirmed the potential of dodecylbenzene as a suitable replacement.  Later, Procter & Gamble used the substance as the basis for Tide (brand)|Tide laundry detergent.

The institute performed much of the early research on air pollution and the formation of ozone in the lower atmosphere. SRI sponsored the National Air Pollution Symposium|First National Air Pollution Symposium in Pasadena, California, in November 1949.

File:SRI ERMA MICR montage.jpg|thumb|left|The [[Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting|ERMA system, which uses magnetic ink character recognition to process checks, was one of SRI's earliest developments.]]
In April 1953, Walt Disney|Walt and Roy O. Disney|Roy Disney hired SRI (and in particular, Harrison Price) to consult on their proposal for establishing an amusement park in Burbank, California. SRI provided information on location, attendance patterns, and economic feasibility. SRI selected a larger site in Anaheim, California|Anaheim, prepared reports about operation, and provided on-site administrative support for Disneyland and acted in an advisory role as the park expanded. In 1955, SRI was commissioned to select a site and provide design suggestions for the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.

In 1952, the Technicolor SA|Technicolor Corporation contracted with SRI to develop a near-instantaneous, electro-optical alternative to the manual process of timing during film copying. In 1959, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences presented the Scientific and Engineering Award jointly to SRI and Technicolor for their work on the design and development of the Technicolor electronic printing timer which greatly benefited the motion picture industry. In 1954, Southern Pacific Transportation Company|Southern Pacific asked SRI to investigate ways of reducing damage during rail freight shipments by mitigating shock to railroad box cars. This investigation led to William K. MacCurdy's development of the Hydra-Cushion technology, which remains standard today.

In the 1950s, SRI worked under the direction of the Bank of America to develop ERMA (Electronic Recording Machine, Accounting) and magnetic ink character recognition (MICR). The ERMA project was led by computer scientist Jerre Noe, who was at the time SRI's assistant director of engineering.  As of 2011, MICR remains the industry standard in automated check processing. 
<!-- for formatting on larger screens -->

