File:SRI Douglas Engelbart 1968.jpg|thumb|right|[[Douglas Engelbart practicing for The Mother of All Demos in 1968]]-->
File:SRI Computer Mouse.jpg|thumb|right|The first prototype of a [[computer mouse, as designed by Bill English (computer engineer)|Bill English]]
Douglas Engelbart, the founder of SRI's Augmentation Research Center (ARC), was the primary force behind the design and development of the multi-user NLS (computer system)|oN-Line System (or NLS), featuring original versions of modern computer-human interface elements including Raster graphics|bit-mapped displays, collaborative software|collaboration software, hypertext, and precursors to the graphical user interface such as the computer mouse. As a pioneer of human-computer interaction, Engelbart is arguably SRI's most notable alumnus. He was awarded the National Medal of Technology and Innovation in 2000.

Bill English (computer engineer)|Bill English, then chief engineer at ARC, built the first prototype of a computer mouse from Engelbart's design in 1964.  SRI also developed inkjet printing (1961) and optical disc recording (1963). Liquid-crystal display (LCD) technology was developed at RCA Laboratories in the 1960s, which later became Sarnoff Corporation in 1988, a wholly owned subsidiary of SRI. Sarnoff was fully integrated into SRI in 2011.

In the early 1960s, Hewitt Crane and his colleagues developed the world's first all-magnetic digital computer, based upon extensions to magnetic core memories. The technology was licensed to TE Connectivity|AMP Inc., who then used it to build specialized computers for controlling tracks in the New York City Subway and on railroad switching yards. Equipped with a video camera|television camera, a Triangulation|triangulating Rangefinding telemeter|rangefinder, and bump sensors, Shakey used software for perception, world-modeling, and acting. The project ended in 1972. SRI's Artificial Intelligence Center marked its 45th anniversary in 2011.

File:SRI Packet Radio Van.jpg|thumb|left|The [[Packet Radio Van, developed by Don Cone, was the site of the first three-way Internetworking|internetworked transmission.]]
On October 29, 1969, the first connection on a wide area network to use packet switching, ARPANET, was established between nodes at Leonard Kleinrock's laboratory at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) and Douglas Engelbart's laboratory at SRI using Interface Message Processors at both sites. The following year, Engelbart's laboratory installed the first TENEX (operating system)|TENEX system outside of BBN Technologies|BBN where it was developed. In addition to SRI and UCLA, University of California, Santa Barbara and the University of Utah were part of the original four network nodes. By December 5, 1969, the entire four-node network was connected. In the 1970s, SRI developed packet-switched radio (a precursor to wireless networking), over-the-horizon radar, Deafnet, vacuum microelectronics, and software-implemented fault tolerance.

The first true Internet transmission occurred on November 22, 1977, when SRI originated the first connection between three disparate networks. Data flowed seamlessly through the mobile Packet Radio Van between SRI in Menlo Park, California and the University of Southern California in Los Angeles via University College London, England, across three types of networks: packet radio, satellite, and the ARPANET.  In 2007, the Computer History Museum presented a 30th anniversary celebration of this demonstration, which included several participants from the 1977 event. SRI would go on to run the InterNIC|Network Information Center under the leadership of Elizabeth J. Feinler|Jake Feinler.


