Russell was born in Portsmouth, England. He attended St Paul's School, London, where he was 1st scholar. He studied physics at Wadham College, Oxford, and was awarded his Bachelor of Arts degree with first-class honours in 1982. He moved to the United States to complete his PhD in computer science at Stanford University in 1986 for research on inductive reasoning and Argument from analogy|analogical reasoning supervised by Michael Genesereth. His PhD was supported by a NATO studentship from the UK Science and Engineering Research Council. From 2008 to 2011 he also held an appointment as adjunct professor of Neurological Surgery at the University of California, San Francisco, where he pursued research in computational physiology and intensive-care unit monitoring.  includes contributions to machine learning, Probabilistic logic|probabilistic reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, Conversion rate optimization|real-time decision making, multitarget tracking, computer vision, and inverse reinforcement learning.

In 2016, he founded the Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence at UC Berkeley, with co-principal investigators Pieter Abbeel, Anca Dragan, Tom Griffiths, Bart Selman, Joseph Halpern, Michael Wellman and Satinder Singh Baveja. Russell has published several hundred conference and journal articles as well as several books, including ''The Use of Knowledge in Analogy and Induction'' and ''Do the Right Thing: Studies in Limited Rationality'' (with Eric Wefald). Along with Peter Norvig, he is the author of ''Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach'', a textbook used by over 1,500 universities in 135 countries. He is on the Scientific Advisory Board for the Future of Life Institute and the advisory board of the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk.

In 2017 he collaborated with the Future of Life Institute to produce a video, ''Slaughterbots'', about swarms of lethal autonomous weapon|drones assassinating political opponents, and presented this to a United Nations meeting about the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons.

In 2018 he contributed an interview to the documentary ''Do You Trust This Computer?''

His book, ''Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control'', was published by Viking on 8 October 2019. His work is aligned with Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence themes. His former doctoral students include Marie desJardins, Eric Xing and Shlomo Zilberstein. with lectures on "The Biggest Event in Human History", "AI in warfare", "AI in the economy" and "AI: A Future for Humans".

