The book ranked #17 on ''The New York Times'' list of best selling science books for August 2014. In the same month, business magnate Elon Musk made headlines by agreeing with the book that artificial intelligence is potentially more dangerous than nuclear weapons.
Bostrom's work on superintelligence has also influenced Bill Gates’s concern for the existential risks facing humanity over the coming century. In a March 2015 interview by Baidu's CEO, Robin Li, Gates said that he would "highly recommend" ''Superintelligence''. According to the ''The New Yorker|New Yorker'', philosophers Peter Singer and Derek Parfit have "received it as a work of importance".

The science editor of the ''Financial Times'' found that Bostrom's writing "sometimes veers into opaque language that betrays his background as a philosophy professor" but convincingly demonstrates that the risk from superintelligence is large enough that society should start thinking now about ways to endow future machine intelligence with positive values. A review in ''The Guardian'' pointed out that "even the most sophisticated machines created so far are intelligent in only a limited sense" and that "expectations that AI would soon overtake human intelligence were first dashed in the 1960s", but the review finds common ground with Bostrom in advising that "one would be ill-advised to dismiss the possibility altogether". Ronald Bailey wrote in the libertarian ''Reason (magazine)|Reason'' that Bostrom makes a strong case that solving the AI control problem is the "essential task of our age". According to Tom Chivers of ''The Daily Telegraph'', the book is difficult to read but nonetheless rewarding. A reviewer in the ''Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence'' broke with others by stating the book's "writing style is clear" and praised the book for avoiding "overly technical jargon". A reviewer in ''Philosophy (journal)|Philosophy'' judged ''Superintelligence'' to be "more realistic" than Ray Kurzweil's ''The Singularity Is Near''.

