The Supreme Intelligence, also known as The Supremor, first appears in ''Fantastic Four (comic book)|Fantastic Four'' #65 (Aug 1967) and was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby. It was introduced as a supercomputer that consisted of the greatest minds of the Kree people for the last million years, and figured as their leader. The Kree built the Supremor after the Skrulls built their own superweapon, the Cosmic Cube. Its main purpose is to further the development of the Kree at any cost.

The Supreme Intelligence was initially a supporting character in first run of Captain Marvel (Marvel Comics)|Captain Marvel featuring the original Captain Marvel (Mar-Vell)|Mar-Vell.

The Supremor's first major role was in the ''Kree–Skrull War'', where it helped Captain Marvel (Mar-Vell)|Mar-Vell and Rick Jones (comics)|Rick Jones unlock Jones' superpower called the ''Destiny Force''.

It returned as the main antagonist for the 19-part fictional crossover|crossover event called ''Operation: Galactic Storm'', also known as the ''Kree/Shi'ar War''. Which features the Kree, Shi'ar, Avengers (comics)|Avengers and Quasar (comics)|Quasar, in which the Avengers intervened in an intergalactic war between the alien Kree and Shi'ar empires. The event introduced the Starforce team, who was created by The Supremor.

After presumed killed in ''Operation: Galactic Storm'', The Supreme Intelligence reemerged in the ''Imperial Guard'' mini and later fully reformed on the blue side of the moon in the Live Kree or Die! story arc. Supremor had transmitted itself to a satellite, which was recovered by its Skrull agents. It was taken in custody by the Avengers and S.H.I.E.L.D. It next appeared in the Limited series (comics)|limited series ''Avengers Forever'', where it assisted the Avengers, who were caught up in a battle across time between Kang the Conqueror and Immortus.

The Supreme Intelligence next appeared in the crossover storyline ''Annihilation (comics)|Annihilation'' and ''Annihilation: Conquest'', it was supplanted by House Fiyero and who drove his greatest supporter Ronan the Accuser|Ronan into exile. Only the Kree were hit by the Annihilation Wave. Ronan lead a coup against the merchant house, slaughtering them and taking control of the empire. The Supremor was lobotomized however and put out of it misery.

In the ''Future Foundation|FF'' and ''Fantastic Four (comic book)|Fantastic Four'' ongoing, Ronan realized the Kree needed a leader superior to him, and decided to resurrect The Supreme Intelligence by using two alternate-reality Reed Richardses, which were absorbed in the new Supreme Intelligence. It immediately set about trying to destroy the Earth and the Inhumans. They eventually ceased hostilities. It later discovered the treachery of Zarek (comics)|Zarek and Ronan, and then honored Kree hero Captain Marvel (Mar-Vell)|Mar-Vell with a new uniform. The Supreme Intelligence was deposed as the leader of the Kree Empire by Ronan. The Supreme Intelligence was revealed to have mentally influenced the human Rick Jones (comics)|Rick Jones and the U.S. Alien Activities Commission from behind the scenes in order to regain its power. It stimulated Rick Jones's psionic potential, the evolutionary potential of the human race, otherwise known as the Destiny Force, to end the Earth vicinity campaign in the first Kree-Skrull War. The Supremor revealed that it realized long ago that the Kree were at an evolutionary dead-end. Its main concern became to find a way to jump-start its race's evolution, and its manipulations of Rick Jones and Mar-Vell were part of this process. The Supreme Intelligence then regained leadership of the Kree Empire. Later, it mentally dominated Ronan, and used Ronan as a pawn in battle against Rick Jones and Captain Marvel. It attempted to absorb the minds of Rick Jones and Captain Marvel, and employed the remote control Supremor androids as a housing for its consciousness.

The Supremor understood that the Skrulls lost their ability to shapeshift, and plotted a new campaign for a second Kree-Skrull War. During this war, the Supreme Intelligence acquired the Soul Gem, which the creature used to maintain peaceful balance between its blue and pink Kree components. It used the Soul Gem to absorb the soul of the Silver Surfer. The Silver Surfer's soul escaped from him and removed the Soul Gem, causing the Supreme Intelligence to lose its sanity. Afterwards, Nenora, a Skrull spy in the guise of a high-ranking Kree official, took command of the Kree empire. The war ended with Nenora being exposed as a Skrull. The Contemplator (Marvel Comics)|Contemplator later began restructuring the Supreme Intelligence's scrambled consciousness. It was then taken over by the mind of the Contemplator. It was soon liberated from the Contemplator's control by a Cotati (comics)|Cotati wizard, although under the Cotati's influence the Supreme Intelligence appointed the alien "Clumsy Foulup" as the supreme Kree Leader. The Supremor was restored to power a while later.

During the "Operation: Galactic Storm" storyline, the Supremor secretly arranged to have a "Nega-Bomb" (a device producing a special kind of radiation gathered from the Negative Zone) detonated in the Kree Galaxy, hoping its energies would reactivate the Kree's genetic potential. But in the process, billions of Kree were killed. This led a group of Avengers (comics)|Avengers to decide to execute it for genocide, against the wishes of the rest of the team.

Supremor wasn't killed; prior to the death of its host computer, it beamed itself to an awaiting starship hidden from the conflict between the Kree and Shi'ar. This ship later was damaged and found by S.H.I.E.L.D., who captured the small computer Supremor was now residing in. S.H.I.E.L.D. kept the Supreme Intelligence on the Earth's moon for study, as Supremor bided its time.

The Kree Empire fell after the Kree-Shi'ar War, with the Kree Empire placed under the rule of the Shi'ar Imperium ruled by Deathbird. The Kree Starforce were her enforcers, now turned into a branch of the Imperial Guard. The Supremor android on the Star Force acted as the Supreme Intelligence's spy into the workings of the remaining Kree Empire.

The Supreme Intelligence soon escaped after it possessed the minds of some S.H.I.E.L.D. scientists and had its body taken to Manhattan, where it planned to explode another Nega-Bomb, this time in the sewers of Manhattan. The Supremor witnessed the first Kree mutation when it encountered one of the Kree Imperial Guard Commando who underwent his mutation when he sought to destroy the computer housing the Supreme Intelligence; however, it was this act that freed Supremor, allowing it to return to the depths of space.

Supremor reached the Kree Empire and had a new housing constructed for it, as it soon managed to obtain the Forever Crystal, a very powerful mystical artifact, from Kang the Conqueror, and used it to advance the Kree's evolution, creating a supposedly new race, the Ruul. Through them, it manipulated the Intergalactic Council into turning against the Earth, but its plans were stopped by the Avengers.

Later on the Intelligence got its wish for more genetic stock for the Kree, when some of the Inhumans|Inhuman tribes reunited with the regrowing Kree Empire. Combined with the Ruul and the mutated Kree, the Kree Empire would soon rise again after throwing off the shackles of the Shi'ar Empire. After the universe was destroyed and recreated by Genis-Vell and Entropy: Son of Eternity (Marvel Comics)|Eternity, the Kree race was restored to its original form.

As of ''Annihilation #2'' it has been declared that the Supreme Intelligence is not in command of the Kree Empire, having been replaced by the merchant House of Fiyero. House Fiyero, in fact, placed the Supreme Intelligence in a state of "living death" and ruled the Kree without its consent. Ronan The Accuser is told by the being's caretakers that it longed for Ronan to return and set the Kree on the correct path against the Annihilation Wave. Realizing that there was nothing to be done to restore the creature to life, Ronan instead shattered the tank and left it to die rather than live in pain, after deposing House Fiyero for their treachery.

The Supreme Intelligence was seen in ''Annihilation Conquest'' where his remains had been retrieved by the Phalanx who are attempting to reactivate him. By reactivating the Supreme Intelligence the Phalanx plan to send a mental echo across space containing a message that will invade the minds of the Kree, turning every Kree in the galaxy into Phalanx at once.  This was foiled by the arrival of the being Wraith (Zak-Del)|Wraith, who allowed the weapon to activate, and used his Exolon swarm to absorb the soul of Supremor, essentially housing the spirit within himself.

On Earth, Noh-Varr (who was the Prison warden|warden of the superhuman prison The Cube (comics)|The Cube at the time) devotes most of his resources into trying to revive the Supreme Intelligence in order to realize his dream of a New Kree Empire.

An alternate reality Supreme Intelligence appears in the form of a holographic message that tells Noh-Varr that the actions of the Skrulls during "Secret Invasion" have left Earth in more danger than ever before and that he is the planet's new protector. The Supreme Intelligence then grants him the power needed to carry out his mission in the form a set of Nega-Bands, more advanced than the ones worn by Captain Marvel. The bands also provide him with a new costume and prevents the Dark Avengers from detecting his presence.

Ronan the Accuser later resurrected the original Supreme Intelligence by melding two alternate reality Mister Fantastic|Reed Richards with the Supremor Seed (a small portion of the Supreme Intelligence held dormant in the Accuser's hammer), a plan devised by the Supreme Intelligence himself 300,000 years ago when he calculated his possible defeat and death in the future. He later informs Noh-Varr of the coming of the Phoenix Force (comics)|Phoenix Force to Earth and orders him to help his Avengers teammates intercept the entity. However, he also must contain it at all costs, even if it means eliminating his teammates.

During the "Infinity (comic book)|Infinity" storyline, the Supreme Intelligence and Ronan the Accuser appeared as members of the Galactic Council. While initially helpful with the Galactic Council's efforts to halt the march of the Builders, the Intelligence commanded its people to surrender once the Kree homeworld was taken by the Builders. After Ronan and his Accuser Corps fractured away to continue the battle, the Supreme Intelligence gave them blanket amnesty upon the success of the campaign.

During "The Black Vortex" storyline, the Supreme Intelligence learns of the Black Vortex' resurgence and sends Ronan and the Accuser Corps to retrieve it from Beast (comics)|Beast, Gamora, and the time-displaced Warren Worthington III|Angel. In retaliation for the Accuser Corps attack, the three cosmic-enhanced characters attacked Hala. The Supreme Intelligence denied Ronan the Accuser's suggestion to use the Black Vortex on them. Though Ronan the Accuser did it anyway and drove off Beast, Gamora, and Angel. The Slaughter Lords led by J'son (character)|Mister Knife show up with plans to obtain the Black Vortex. As the Slaughter Lords start to destroy Hala, the Supreme Intelligence ordered the Accuser Corps to leave Hala while it stayed behind.

The Inhuman Royal Family's expedition led by Noh-Varr later arrived on Hala. Noh-Varr planted the a seed from We-Plex Supreme Intelligence System from Earth-200080 into the Supreme Intelligence's remains. This resulted in the resurrection of the Plex Intelligence as it absorbs the material from the other Supreme Intelligence.

During the "Infinity Countdown" storyline, this new form of the Supreme Intelligence was renamed the Extreme Intelligence. It planned to have the Infinity Gems acquired so that it can resurrect the Kree empire.

