The Kree Supreme Intelligence is a vast cybernetic/organic computer system composed of 5,000 cubic meters of computer circuitry incorporating the disembodied brains of the greatest statesmen and philosophers in Kree history, preserved cryogenically. This aggregation of brains creates a single collective intelligence able to use the vast information storage and processing capabilities of the computer system in a creative way. When wishing to interact with it, the Kree address it within its terminal chamber, where a holographic image is projected on a gigantic monitor screen.

The Supreme Intelligence possesses a seemingly immeasurable intellect, with vast knowledge far surpassing that of present-day Earth. It possesses information storage and processing abilities far above that of the human brain, and has access to the total resources of the Kree Empire. Despite being stationary and basically immobile, the Intelligence possesses all known psionic powers, such as telepathy, precognition, telekinesis, cosmic awareness, sensory link, information absorption, postcognition, etc.

Supremor is also capable of manipulating energy and matter, as well as create up to three remote controlled android servitors as surrogate bodies, that act as its eyes and ears when away from itself. These androids, called Supremor also, possess some degree of independence when created, but are totally loyal to Supremor.

It projects images of itself across space, Cyberspace and even into the Astral Plane, in the form of a huge, amorphous, greenish, humanoid face, with tentacle-like "hair", to communicate with its agents scattered across the cosmos. It has even assumed the form of an orange dragon with a green-skinned octopus as its head, called the Multitude.

Its power was enhanced when it merged with an inert Cosmic Cube, which now serves as its true housing, kept in a separate room from the organic computer facade it created to fool would-be assassins. Upon assuming its new housing, Supremor was now able to control reality within a limited distance of itself, as well as able to open up portals between dimensions, most notably the Astral Plane and the dimension of Death.

