main article|Robot|Droid (Star Wars)}}

File:Greenlive Lely Juno.JPG|thumb|Agricultural barrel-shaped robots such as the Greenlive [[Lely Juno play important roles in assisting humans with labour chores (in this case farming) similar to the civilian robots seen in ''Star Wars''.
]]

Some robots in the ''Star Wars'' universe are capable of performing multiple types of tasks, while others can only perform one type of task. For example, Star Wars characters|21-B is built for the sole purpose of performing medical tasks. Others, such as humanoid protocol droids like C-3PO, are built for multiple purposes. These range from basic physical chores to translating between different forms of communication, including with sophisticated computers and other forms of artificial intelligence. Other, barrel-shaped robots, such as R2-D2, are built with multiple features and capabilities. These include repairing and programming advanced devices, as well as maintaining them.

The basic concepts and purposes for robotics in ''Star Wars'', as in real life, are to reduce human labour, assist humans with sophisticated requirements, as well as store and manage complex information. Another parallel to the modern world is the use of robots in ''Star Wars'' for tasks not considered safe or acceptable for humans. Robots are also seen as a source of cutting human labour costs. A related development is the creation of the droid BB-8 for the film ''Star Wars Episode VII: The Force Awakens'' (made by different manufacturers). In the film, BB-8 is a semi-automated robot, operated by remote control, unlike C-3PO (played by Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (played by Kenny Baker (English actor)|Kenny Baker), who were portrayed by actual actors. The BB-8 toy is operated by remote control, but it also has some independent features, and shares its manner of movement and other features with the film's BB-8.

In 2010, NASA developed robots inspired by the hovering remote-controlled droids, seen in the ''Star Wars'' films and other media, and used by the Jedi for lightsaber combat training. These robots were used in NASA space stations for experimentation. Also in 2010, a hacker developed similar robots, but only capable of floating beyond a limited magnetic range.

