Main|Industrial Revolution|Second Industrial Revolution|Digital Revolution}}
File:Late model Ford Model T.jpg|thumb|upright=0.8|The [[automobile revolutionized personal transportation.|alt=Photo of a Ford Model T on a road]]
Starting in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, the discovery of steam power set off the Industrial Revolution, which saw wide-ranging technological discoveries, particularly in the areas of British Agricultural Revolution|agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transport, and the widespread application of the factory system. This was followed a century later by the Second Industrial Revolution which led to rapid scientific discovery, standardization, and mass production. New technologies were developed, including Sewage treatment|sewage systems, electricity, Electric light|light bulbs, electric motors, railroads, Car|automobiles, and airplanes. These technological advances led to significant developments in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering. They were accompanied by consequential social change, with the introduction of skyscrapers accompanied by rapid urbanization. Communication improved with the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, and television.

The 20th century brought a host of innovations. In physics, the discovery of nuclear fission in the Atomic Age led to both nuclear weapons and nuclear power. Computers were invented and later shifted from Analog computer|analog to digital in the Digital Revolution. Information technology, particularly optical fiber and optical amplifiers led to the birth of the Internet, which ushered in the Information Age. The Space Age began with the launch of Sputnik 1 in 1957, and later the launch of Human spaceflight|crewed missions to the moon in the 1960s. Organized efforts to search for extraterrestrial intelligence have used radio telescopes to detect signs of technology use, or ''technosignatures'', given off by alien civilizations. In medicine, new technologies were developed for diagnosis (CT scan|CT, Positron emission tomography|PET, and MRI scanning), treatment (like the dialysis machine, defibrillator, Artificial cardiac pacemaker|pacemaker, and a wide array of new pharmaceutical drugs), and research (like interferon cloning and DNA microarrays).

Complex manufacturing and construction techniques and organizations are needed to make and maintain more modern technologies, and entire Industry (economics)|industries have arisen to develop succeeding generations of increasingly more complex tools. Modern technology increasingly relies on training and education&nbsp;– their designers, builders, maintainers, and users often require sophisticated general and specific training. Moreover, these technologies have become so complex that entire fields have developed to support them, including engineering, medicine, and computer science; and other fields have become more complex, such as construction, transportation, and architecture.

