Main|2 = Neolithic Revolution}}
File:Néolithique 0001.jpg|thumb|An array of Neolithic artifacts, including bracelets, axe heads, chisels, and polishing tools|alt=Photo of Neolithic tools on display

The Neolithic Revolution (or ''First Agricultural Revolution'') brought about an acceleration of technological innovation, and a consequent increase in social complexity. The invention of the polished Hand axe|stone axe was a major advance that allowed large-scale deforestation|forest clearance and farming. This use of polished stone axes increased greatly in the Neolithic but was originally used in the preceding Mesolithic in some areas such as Ireland. Agriculture fed larger populations, and the transition to sedentism allowed for the simultaneous raising of more children, as infants no longer needed to be carried around by nomads. Additionally, children could contribute labor to the raising of crops more readily than they could participate in hunter-gatherer activities.

With this increase in population and availability of labor came an increase in labor specialization. What triggered the progression from early Neolithic villages to the first cities, such as Uruk, and the first civilizations, such as Sumer, is not specifically known; however, the emergence of increasingly hierarchy|hierarchical social structures and specialized labor, of trade and war amongst adjacent cultures, and the need for collective action to overcome environmental challenges such as irrigation, are all thought to have played a role.

The invention of History of writing|writing led to the spread of cultural knowledge and became the basis for history, library|libraries, schools, and science|scientific research.

Continuing improvements led to the Metallurgical furnace|furnace and bellows and provided, for the first time, the ability to smelting|smelt and forging|forge gold, copper, silver, and lead native metals found in relatively pure form in nature. The advantages of copper tools over stone, bone and wooden tools were quickly apparent to early humans, and native copper was probably used from near the beginning of Neolithic times (about 10 ka). Native copper does not naturally occur in large amounts, but copper ores are quite common and some of them produce metal easily when burned in wood or charcoal fires. Eventually, the working of metals led to the discovery of alloys such as bronze and brass (about 4,000 BCE). The first use of iron alloys such as steel dates to around 1,800 BCE.

