Technology which allows for the manipulation of gravity is a common feature in the ''Star Wars'' films and other media. Examples include the use of tractor beams, force fields which envelop an object and manipulate it remotely, and repulsorlifts, which push against a planet's gravity to create lift. Interdiction fields create gravitational shadows which prevent ''Star Wars'' ships from using their Hyperdrive (Star Wars)|hyperdrives or pull them out of Hyperspace (Star Wars)|hyperspace.]]
Levitation (physics)|Levitation is depicted throughout the ''Star Wars'' films, as well as in most other spin-off media of the franchise. Levitation in ''Star Wars'' is primarily caused by a type of anti-gravity technology known within the setting as a "repulsorlift engine." According to in-universe material, a fusion-powered repulsorlift or 'antigrav' creates a field of negative gravity that pushes against the natural gravitational field of a planet. Terrestrial vehicles such as landspeeders and speeder bikes use this technology to propel themselves across a planet's surface. Repulsorlifts are also used by spacecraft as secondary engines for atmospheric flight and planetary landings and take-offs.

Other vehicles that utilize repulsorlift engines include Jabba the Hutt's sail barge and List of Star Wars air, aquatic, and ground vehicles#Snowspeeder (T-47 Airspeeder)|snowspeeders. Many droids and robots also use this technology to hover and move above a planet's surface, such as the Imperial Probe Droid.  The carbonite freezing coffin that kept Han Solo in suspension was suspended in mid-air using a gravity repulsion force field.

Levitation by this method is currently considered a physical impossibility by today's means. Despite being a current scientific impossibility, research on such concepts are still being hypothesized and exercised by scientists today, with occasional minor breakthroughs.

Magnetic levitation already exists in modern times, but with fundamental differences from levitation seen in ''Star Wars''. An example of vehicles that maintain constant levitation without the use of constant propulsion is the Maglev train. The Maglev train stays afloat by using the magnetic repulsion of like charges, but relies on the surface that it travels above, in its case, the train tracks, to have the same charge as its own coils, resulting in a magnetic repulsion.

One possibility for magnetic levitation as seen in ''Star Wars'' is suggested by physics associate professor Michael Dennin. According to him, if a planet was made out of the right magnetic materials, such as iron or nickel, the vehicle could then produce a repulsive charge, allowing it to lift above the surface. The hoverbike has been repeatedly compared to the hoverbikes seen in the ''Star Wars'' films. It is unclear, however, whether these hoverbikes were actually inspired by ''Star Wars'' or not. Another fundamental difference, besides their power sources, is that the hoverbikes in ''Star Wars'' can only climb a few meters above the ground, unlike the current ones being developed. Malloy's company, Malloy Aeronautics, is reported to have partnered with an American-based company for further experimenting, as well as developing Malloy's hoverbikes for the US military.

