Technology'' is a term dating back to the Renaissance|early 17th century that meant 'systematic treatment' (from Ancient Greek|Greek , from the |tékhnē|craft, art}} and , 'study, knowledge').'''' It is predated in use by the Ancient Greek word ''τέχνη|tékhnē'', used to mean 'knowledge of how to make things', which encompassed activities like architecture.

Starting in the 19th century, continental Europeans started using the terms ''Technik'' (German) or ''technique'' (French) to refer to a 'way of doing', which included all technical arts, such as dancing, navigation, or printing, whether or not they required tools or instruments.

In the 20th century, as a result of Progress|scientific progress and the Second Industrial Revolution, ''technology'' stopped being considered a distinct academic discipline and took on its current-day meaning: the systemic use of knowledge to practical ends. Around 2 Year#Abbreviations yr and ya|Mya (million years ago), they learned to make the first stone tools by hammering flakes off a pebble, forming a sharp hand axe. This practice was refined 75 kya (thousand years ago) into pressure flaking, enabling much finer work.

The Control of fire by early humans|discovery of fire was described by Charles Darwin as "possibly the greatest ever made by man". Archaeological, dietary, and social evidence point to "continuous [human] fire-use" at least 1.5 Mya. Fire, fueled with wood and charcoal, allowed early humans to cook their food to increase its digestibility, improving its nutrient value and broadening the number of foods that could be eaten. The ''Control of fire by early humans#The cooking hypothesis|cooking hypothesis'' proposes that the ability to cook promoted an increase in hominid brain size, though some researchers find the evidence inconclusive. Archaeological evidence of hearths was dated to 790 kya; researchers believe this is likely to have intensified human socialization and may have contributed to the emergence of language.

Other technological advances made during the Paleolithic era include clothing and shelter. No consensus exists on the approximate time of adoption of either technology, but archaeologists have found archaeological evidence of clothing 90-120 kya and shelter 450 kya. Clothing, adapted from the fur and hides of hunted animals, helped humanity expand into colder regions; humans began to Early human migrations|migrate out of Africa around 200 kya, initially moving to Eurasia.

