Deleted image removed: File:Luke-Treadwell close large.jpg|thumb|150px|[[Luke Skywalker next to a moisture vaporator on Tatooine with a treadwell droid, WED-15-77, beside it. Online Canadian magazine, OttawaLife reports that machinery such as the moisture vaporators are becoming a reality, very similar to those seen in ''Star Wars'' with various beneficial purposes such as providing water in harsh conditions and fighting desertification.
]] -->
Aside from droids/robots, the use of artificial intelligence and computers is found very commonly in the ''Star Wars'' universe. Computing technology exists in many different forms in both the ''Star Wars'' movies and Star Wars expanded to other media|other media, with the capacity to process large volumes of data every millisecond and store it for safekeeping. Examples include simple viewscreens that receive and display information; scanners which examine an object, interpret the collected data and present it to the user; and data-pads, portable computers (often handheld) which allow individuals to access and interpret information.

An example of computing devices which perform very complex tasks in the ''Star Wars'' franchise are navigational computers, also called nav-computers or navi-computers, which form a key part of many ''Star Wars'' spacecraft. Such computers are said to store vast libraries of astrogation knowledge and work with their ships' sensors and Hyperdrive (Star Wars)|hyperdrive to plot safe courses in real-space and Hyperspace (Star Wars)|hyperspace. Source material makes it clear that only the desperate or foolhardy would attempt traveling in hyperspace without an up-to-date navi-computer as a ship can easily smash into a hazard without one. Some small ''Star Wars'' spacecraft (such as the X-wing) use an astromech droid in place of a navi-computer due to size restrictions.

A unique form of data storage found in the ''Star Wars'' universe is the Holocron, a type of artefact used by both Jedi and Sith to store vital and sensitive knowledge, usually concerning the Force (Star Wars)|Force. Holocrons resemble evenly-proportioned polyhedrons and typically store information in the form of holographic lessons. Many will only permit access to someone who is sensitive in the Force, and for additional security may require a separate memory crystal in order to activate. More mundane forms of data storage exist in the ''Star Wars'' franchise, though some have tremendous capacity. The IGV-55 Surveillance Vessel, a class of Galactic Empire (Star Wars)|Imperial spy ship seen in the ''Star Wars Rebels'' television series, possess a massive database that can store billions of yottabytes of data.

In a 2016 article for TechCrunch, contributor Evaldo H. de Oliveira estimated the amount of data needed to manage the Death Star was in excess of 40,000 yottabytes. This included an estimate that the Death Star's crew would generate 8.84 exabytes per year, with an additional 2.08 exabytes generated per year by its droid population.

An example of multi-purpose artificial intelligence is seen in moisture , devices that produce water from hydrogen and oxygen in the air. These are first seen on film on the planet Tatooine in ''A New Hope''. Their artificial intelligence is more basic than most other forms of artificial intelligence seen in the ''Star Wars'' universe, dealing with input from humidity and air density sensors. They use this input to help them take samples from the air and produce water. They also require input from robots. The film also shows Owen Lars, Luke's uncle, telling C-3PO that he needs a droid that can really understand the language of moisture , with the droid claiming that it is in his programming.

Cybersecurity also plays a major role in the films and other media, with many real-world counterparts. The term ''slicer'' is the in-universe designation for a hacker in the ''Star Wars'' universe, describing individuals such as DJ (Star Wars)|DJ (Benicio del Toro) from ''The Last Jedi''. A form of security token is worn by Galactic Empire (Star Wars)|Imperial and First Order (Star Wars)|First Order officers called a code or access cylinder, which grants them access to restricted areas or databases. Corey Nachreiner, in a 2017 GeekWire article, also examined some of the lessons in cyber-security offered by ''Rogue One''. This include the need to safeguard the Internet of Things represented by the droid character K-2SO (Alan Tudyk) and the need for strong multi-factor authentication.


