File:Atlas front view (drawling).png|thumb|155px|Front view illustration of an [[Atlas robot developed by Boston Dynamics (now owned by Google) in co-operation with an agency of the United States Department of Defense]]



Military robots in the ''Star Wars'' universe are built on the same principles as modern military robotics. While most military robots in the modern world are designed in various shapes, depending on their purpose, the military robots of the ''Star Wars'' universe are primarily humanoid, and built to imitate live, Living organisms|organic soldiers, mainly human ones.

A major similarity between modern military robotics and those of the ''Star Wars'' universe is that different robots are built and designed for different specific purposes, whether those purposes are ground warfare, maritime warfare, aerial warfare, or space warfare, as seen in the ''Star Wars'' prequel films. Such uses are considered unpractical and unfeasible by current means, given the sophistication and resources each individual unit would require.

Another significant, recognizable distinction of the robots in the ''Star Wars'' universe, whether military or civilian, is their strong sense of independence and self-awareness, compared to current robots. This is mainly due to ''Star Wars'' robots having much more advanced sensors and self-computing systems than current robots do. Despite the limited abilities of current robots, Dr. Jonathan Roberts, director of CSTRO Autonomous Systems Laboratory, proclaims that the role of robots in assisting humans is going to increase, similarly to what is seen in ''Star Wars''.

The ''Christian Science Monitor'' reported in 2011 that an American blogger, out of patriotism, tried to raise money to build a robotic AT-AT for the United States military|US military. Heikko Hoffman, a robotics expert from HRL Laboratories, who was not associated with the project, claims that AT-ATs are possible, though some of their designs should be changed from those seen in the ''Star Wars'' universe, for safety, and for financial and operational costs. The project, though not terminated, was suspended, due to intellectual property concerns from Lucasfilm.

In 2012, the United States Navy built a robot modelled after C-3PO, but appears to function for both military and civilian purposes.


