A tractor beam is described as an invisible force field that can grab, trap, suspend, and move objects with force. According to ''Star Wars'' sources, tractor beams generators and projectors are common components on many spacecraft, with both military and civilian applications. Tractor beams can be used to move cargo, tow disabled vessels, or assist in docking manoeuvres. They can also be used offensively to slow down or immobilize an opponent, though targeting fast and manoeuvrable ships can be challenging. Additional uses are made of this technology for other purposes as well. Open-topped taxis on Coruscant emit tractor fields when in flight to keep passengers securely seated without requiring restraints. The AT-TE possess tractor-field generators in its footpads for a stronger grip over uneven ground.

Scientists have explored the concept of tractor beams, having some success since the early 2010s. In that time, they have managed to produce lasers with unusual intensity-beam profiles<!-- Intensity-beam profile: Is it a real thing? -->that allow them to attract and repel tiny particles. Some breakthroughs include the successful project of a team of science researchers from the Australian National University, who managed to produce a doughnut shaped laser that can drag hollow glass spheres by a distance of roughly 7.8 inches, several times the distance of previous experiments.

Another successful experiment was conducted at the University of Bristol, which revealed that sound could be manipulated to produce possible future tractor beams, rivalling light. This could be done using a precisely timed sequence of sound waves, produced by tiny loudspeakers, creating a limited space with low pressure that can counteract gravity and levitate objects.

ExtremeTech reports that smartphones created at HP labs are now bringing 3D holographic technology from ''Star Wars'' closer to reality.

Also, Fox News reported that Australian National University students were close to developing ''Star Wars-''style holograms. A researcher for the project said that the material the device consists of will be transparent and used in a wide range of applications, as well as “complex manipulations with light.”. 


