A paper by Mahendra Prasad, published in ''AI Magazine'', asserts that the 18th-century mathematician Marquis de Condorcet was the first person to hypothesize and mathematically model an intelligence explosion and its effects on humanity.

An early description of the idea was made in John W. Campbell's 1932 short story "The Last Evolution".

In his 1958 obituary for John von Neumann, Ulam recalled a conversation with von Neumann about the "ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue."

In 1988, Vinge used the phrase "technological singularity" (including "technological") in the short story collection ''Threats and Other Promises'', writing in the introduction to his story "The Whirligig of Time" (p.&nbsp;72): ''Barring a worldwide catastrophe, I believe that technology will achieve our wildest dreams, and'' soon. ''When we raise our own intelligence and that of our creations, we are no longer in a world of human-sized characters. At that point we have fallen into a technological "black hole", a technological singularity.''

In 1988, Hans Moravec published ''Mind Children'',

Frank J. Tipler|Tipler's 1994 book ''The Physics of Immortality (book)|The Physics of Immortality'' predicts a future where super–intelligent machines will build enormously powerful computers, people will be "emulated" in computers, life will reach every galaxy and people will achieve immortality when they reach Omega Point. There is no talk of Vingean "singularity" or sudden intelligence explosion, but intelligence much greater than human is there, as well as immortality.

In 1996, Yudkowsky predicted a singularity by 2021. For example, Kurzweil extrapolates current technological trajectories past the arrival of self-improving AI or superhuman intelligence, which Yudkowsky argues represents a tension with both I. J. Good's proposed discontinuous upswing in intelligence and Vinge's thesis on unpredictability.

Former President of the United States Barack Obama spoke about singularity in his interview to ''Wired (magazine)|Wired'' in 2016:


