externalvideo|video1=[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CroLulZIhCA ''Shields Up! The Physics of Star Wars'' Leicester University]}}

The use of Force field (fiction)|force fields in the ''Star Wars'' universe is documented both in the main films of the Star Wars saga and in spin-off media, such as Clone Wars (Star Wars)|The Clone Wars, as well as other media adaptations.  According to reference material, protective force fields used to defend starships, buildings, armies and other objects from attack are known as '''deflector shields''' and come in two main types. Particle shields repel solid objects such as space debris or high-velocity projectiles. Ray shields (or energy shields) repel radiation, lasers, Blaster (Star Wars)|blasters and other energy-based attacks. Deflector shields which envelop an object can either be generated by it or be projected onto it from another location.

Deflector fields come in many different sizes and varieties in the ''Star Wars'' universe, as seen in the films and explained in background literature. Droidekas, which made their theatrical appearance in ''The Phantom Menace'', are equipped with deflector shields that are polarized to allow their own blaster bolts to pass through while stopping any fire coming from outside. In ''The Empire Strikes Back'' a shield system protects the Rebels' Echo Base on Hoth. Projected by modules studded throughout the surrounding territory and powered by a central generator, only slow-moving ground-contact vehicles (such as Walker (Star Wars)|Walkers) can penetrate the shield. The incomplete Death Star II is protected remotely via deflector shield generator located on the Endor (Star Wars)|Endor in ''Return of the Jedi''. Identified as a SLD-26 Planetary Shield Generator, it can envelop a small moon (or large space station) with a nearly impenetrable shield for an indefinite period of time. In ''Rogue One: A Star Wars Story'', the tropical planet Scarif is completely enveloped in a deflector shield to prevent anyone from landing or leaving the planet without Imperial authorization except by a single shield gate.

Many ''Star Wars'' List of Star Wars spacecraft|spacecraft and List of Star Wars starfighters|starfighters are said to possess generators which create both types of deflector shields around them to protect against normal space travel and enemy attacks. Smaller vessels may only have a single deflector shield generator which can be adjusted to protect specific parts of the ship, while larger vessels may have multiple generators each protecting a specific area.

In 2014, physics students at the University of Leicester developed a module of plasma-based deflector shields, inspired by the ones in ''Star Wars'' and other science fiction stories. However, the field poses some issues. One issue is that the deflector shield would have to be much stronger to repel than to hold the plasma in position. Another is that the shield would deflect electromagnetic energy, including light. This would make it impossible for someone inside the shield to see anything.

In 2015, the American megacorporation Boeing built plasma-based force fields, similar in size and dimensions to the force fields used in ''Star Wars'' ground battles. Like the ground force fields in the ''Star Wars'' films, these shields cannot block or repel solid matter, but are instead built to protect vehicles from the force of explosions.

