On a production budget of $80 million, principal photography began in Thailand on January 17, 2022, with Greig Fraser (who was also a co-producer) and Oren Soffer as Cinematographer|cinematographers, and Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on cinema|COVID-19 safety precautions in place. To give the film the feel of classic Hollywood epics such as ''Ben-Hur (1959 film)|Ben-Hur'' (1959), the filmmakers opted to shoot in the 2.76:1 ultra-wide aspect ratio.

File:เขาล่องเรือตาหมื่น บ้านมุง เนินมะปราง 01.jpg|thumb|The film backdrop features landforms of [[Ban Mung, Thailand As the trailer was released, hyped-up Thai fans also pointed out a scene shot at Makkasan station of Bangkok's Airport Rail Link (Bangkok)|ARL.

For their duties, Fraser was involved in the pre-production process before moving to working remotely due to his commitment to ''Dune: Part Two'' (2024), while Soffer, for his first major studio film, served as the main director of photography throughout the production shoot. In an interview with ''Total Film'', Edwards, who  was also a camera operator, commended Soffer and what he brought to the film, calling him a "real future rising star in the DoP world. He's super-smart. He's got a great eye." The film was shot on the prosumer Sony FX3 camera, the low cost of which is a rarity for a blockbuster film. Edwards confirmed the camera's usage at the "Directors on Directing" panel at the 2023 San Diego Comic-Con, where director and fellow panelist Louis Leterrier noted that this creative decision could "change cinema" forever. In light of the budget, the filmmakers utilized guerrilla filmmaking methods by having very few crew members and natural lighting on set for select on-location scenes, and limited sound recording. Rather than building sets, or relying exclusively on digital methods such as greenscreens or StageCraft, the production found it was more cost effective to send a small crew to film in 80 locations around the world which came closest to matching the desired sci-fi look. Then, only once the producers had Picture lock|finalised the edit were visual effects layered into the images. Using this method, Edwards estimated the production spent only $80 million on a project which would have typically cost $300 million. Filming wrapped on May 30, 2022.

