A first look at the film was shown at CinemaCon on April 26, 2023, with editorial director Anthony D'Alessandro of ''Deadline Hollywood'' praising the production design, saying that it made "''Blade Runner'' look like child's play". It was also announced that the title was renamed from ''True Love'' to ''The Creator''.

The film's teaser trailer, set to a remix of Aerosmith's "Dream On (Aerosmith song)|Dream On", premiered online on May 17, 2023. The official trailer was released on July 17, 2023, three days after the beginning of the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. James Whitbrook of ''Gizmodo'' and EJ Tangonan of ''JoBlo.com'' found the move coincidental, given the similarities between the film's premise and SAG-AFTRA's fears of the film studios using artificial intelligence to synthetic media|replicate the likenesses of actors without compensation. Edwards agreed with this take, saying "I have a trick with AI is to get the timing as a sweet spot window where it's before the apocalypse and not after, which I think it's in November — maybe December — and so, I think we got really lucky...The joke would be that when you write a film, especially a science fiction film, I try to avoid putting a date...at some point, you have to so, I picked 2070. Now I feel like an idiot because I should’ve gone for 2023 'cause everything that's been unfolding in the last few months is kind of scary and weird."

Exclusive footage from one of the film's battle sequences and a first listen to some of Zimmer's score were presented at the 2023 San Diego Comic-Con on July 21, 2023. A behind-the-scenes featurette introducing Edwards' vision for the film and featuring interviews with the cast was released on August 21, 2023. An IMAX fan event showcasing exclusive footage from the film with a live Q&A with Edwards took place in select IMAX theaters nationwide on August 29, 2023, one month before the film's release.

Publicity stunts were also conducted in September 2023 when actors dressed as "AI robots" depicted in the film appeared during a National Football League game between the Los Angeles Chargers and the Miami Dolphins at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California, a Major League Baseball game between the San Diego Padres and the St. Louis Cardinals at Petco Stadium in San Diego, and the first race of the Autotrader EchoPark Automotive 400 at Texas Motor Speedway in Fort Worth, Texas. A book showcasing concept artwork and a behind-the-scenes look at the making of the film, written by James Mottram, was published by Insight Editions and released by Simon & Schuster on November 14, 2023.

