Robby the Robot in ''Forbidden Planet'' (1956) has a hierarchical command structure which keeps him from harming humans, even when ordered to do so, as such orders cause a conflict and lock-up very much in the manner of Asimov's robots. Robby is one of the first cinematic depictions of a robot with internal safeguards put in place in this fashion. Asimov was delighted with Robby and noted that Robby appeared to be programmed to follow his Three Laws.

Image:Bicentennial-man-three-laws.jpg|thumb|NDR-114 explaining the Three Laws
Isaac Asimov's works have been adapted for cinema several times with varying degrees of critical and commercial success. Some of the more notable attempts have involved his "Robot" stories, including the Three Laws. 

The film ''Bicentennial Man (film)|Bicentennial Man'' (1999) features Robin Williams as the Three Laws robot NDR-114 (the serial number is partially a reference to Stanley Kubrick's CRM 114 (device)|signature numeral). Williams recites the Three Laws to his employers, the Martin family, aided by a holographic projection. The film only loosely follows the original story.

Harlan Ellison's proposed screenplay for ''I, Robot (film)|I, Robot'' began by introducing the Three Laws, and issues growing from the Three Laws form a large part of the screenplay's plot development. Due to various complications in the Hollywood moviemaking system, to which Ellison's introduction devotes much invective, his screenplay was never filmed.

In the 1986 movie Aliens (film)|''Aliens'', after the android List of Alien characters|Bishop accidentally cuts himself. he attempts to reassure Ellen Ripley|Ripley by stating that: "It is impossible for me to harm or by omission of action, allow to be harmed, a human being". 

The plot of the film released in 2004 under the name, ''I, Robot (film)|I, Robot'' is "suggested by" Asimov's robot fiction stories
and advertising for the film included a trailer featuring the Three Laws followed by the aphorism, "Rules were made to be broken". The film opens with a recitation of the Three Laws and explores the implications of the #Zeroth Law added|Zeroth Law as a logical extrapolation. The major conflict of the film comes from a computer artificial intelligence reaching the conclusion that humanity is incapable of taking care of itself.

The 2019 Netflix original series ''Better than Us'' includes the 3 laws in the opening of episode 1.

