Cardy was born in Sydney on 12 June 1994. He has two older sisters: Alex, a cinematographer, and Stephanie, a doctor. He and his sisters took piano and drum lessons during childhood at the behest of their parents, and he was the only one who chose to continue when their parents asked them if they wanted to stop. He studied music and psychology at the University of Sydney, then studied technical and further education to sharpen his music production skills. Around this time, he also played drums for Sydney band the Lulu Raes. That year, he also began working with the radio station Triple J on its now-popular "Song Sequels" segments, in which he produces parodies of famous songs. A week later, he released his debut EP, ''Artificial Intelligence (EP)|Artificial Intelligence''. On 12 August, he was a guest on Triple J's drive time|drivetime program ''Hobba & Hing'', where he discussed how the EP came to be made. On 9 September, he released the single "Fruit Salad". On 20 October, he was nominated for the Craft Award for Writing at the 11th Streamy Awards. On 3 November, he was shortlisted for the audience-voted Favourite Digital Content Creator Award at the 11th AACTA Awards,

On 23 January 2022, Cardy had two songs voted into Triple J's Triple J Hottest 100, 2021|Hottest 100 of 2021 when "H.Y.C.Y.BH" and "Mixed Messages" were respectively ranked at No. 17 and No. 11. On 9 February, he was cast alongside musician Montaigne (musician)|Montaigne in the Special Broadcasting Service|SBS musical comedy ''Time to Buy''. On 21 February, he was featured in an interview published by ''Rolling Stone Australia''. In the interview, he discussed his sudden popularity on TikTok and explained that his success mostly comes from creating a number of extremely short songs designed to be shared online, some of which get expanded into full-length songs. On 6 August, he uploaded the video for a new song titled "Hey, I Don't Work Here" and announced that his debut studio album would be released in the near future. The album, titled ''Big Dumb Idiot'', was released on 9 December 2022.

