According to Nick Bostrom, Self-transcendence|transcendentalist impulses have been expressed at least as far back as the quest for immortality in the ''Epic of Gilgamesh'', as well as in historical quests for the Fountain of Youth, the Elixir of Life, and other efforts to stave off aging and death. In his ''Divine Comedy'', Dante Alighieri|Dante coined the word ''trasumanar'' meaning "to transcend human nature, to pass beyond human nature" in the first canto of Paradiso (Dante)|Paradiso.

The interweaving of transhumanist aspirations with the scientific imagination can be seen in the works of some precursors of Age of Enlightenment|Enlightenment such as Francis Bacon. One of the early precursors to transhumanist ideas is ''Discourse on Method'' (1637) by René Descartes. In the ''Discourse'', Descartes envisioned a new kind of medicine that could grant both physical immortality and stronger minds.

In his first edition of ''Enquiry Concerning Political Justice|Political Justice'' (1793), William Godwin included arguments favoring the possibility of "earthly immortality" (what would now be called physical immortality). Godwin explored the themes of life extension and immortality in his Gothic fiction|gothic novel St. Leon (novel)|''St.&nbsp;Leon'', which became popular (and notorious) at the time of its publication in 1799, but is now mostly forgotten. ''St.&nbsp;Leon'' may have provided inspiration for his daughter Mary Shelley's novel ''Frankenstein''.

Ether Day, marking a significant milestone in human history, celebrated its 175th anniversary on October 16, 2021. It was on this day that dentist William T. G. Morton achieved a groundbreaking feat by administering the first public ether anesthesia in Boston. This breakthrough not only allowed for the alleviation of pain with a reasonable level of risk but also helped safeguard individuals from psychological trauma by inducing wiktionary:inconscience|unconsciousness.

There is debate about whether the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche can be considered an influence on transhumanism, despite its exaltation of the ''Übermensch'' (overhuman), due to its emphasis on self-actualization rather than technological transformation.

The late 19th to early 20th century movement known as Russian cosmism, by Russian philosopher Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov|N. F. Fyodorov, is noted for anticipating transhumanist ideas. In 1966, FM-2030 (formerly F. M. Esfandiary), a futurist who taught "new concepts of the human" at The New School, in New York City, began to identify people who adopt technologies, lifestyles and worldviews transitional to posthumanity as "transhuman". These ideas have been common transhumanist themes ever since.

Japanese Metabolist architects produced a manifesto in 1960 which outlined goals to "encourage active metabolic development of our society" through design and technology. In the Metabolism (architecture)#Material and Man|Material and Man section of the manifesto, Noboru Kawazoe suggests that:<blockquote>After several decades, with the rapid progress of communication technology, every one will have a "brain wave receiver" in his ear, which conveys directly and exactly what other people think about him and vice versa. What I think will be known by all the people. There is no more individual consciousness, only the will of mankind as a whole.</blockquote>

