File:UK Government hosts AI Summit at Bletchley Park (53302846575).jpg|thumb|upright=1.3|Musk at UK's [[2023 AI Safety Summit|AI safety summit at Bletchley Park, November 2023]]
Musk has frequently spoken about the Existential risk from advanced artificial intelligence|potential dangers of artificial intelligence, calling it "the most serious threat to the survival of the human race". During a 2014 interview at the MIT AeroAstro Centennial Symposium, Musk described artificial intelligence as humanity's largest existential threat, further stating, "I'm increasingly inclined to think that there should be some Regulation of AI|regulatory oversight, maybe at the national and international level, just to make sure that we don't do something very foolish." Musk described the creation of AI as "summoning the demon".

Despite this, Musk was formerly co-chairman of OpenAI and invested in DeepMind, an AI firm, and Vicarious (Company)|Vicarious, a company working to improve machine intelligence. In January 2015, he donated $10&nbsp;million to the nonprofit Future of Life Institute, an organization focused on challenges posed by advanced technologies, and is an advisor to the organisation. Musk has said that his investments are "not from the standpoint of actually trying to make any investment return... I like to just keep an eye on what's going on with artificial intelligence. I think there is potentially a dangerous outcome there. There have been movies about this, you know, like ''Terminator (franchise)|Terminator''. There are some scary outcomes. And we should try to make sure the outcomes are good, not bad."

Musk's opinions about AI have provoked controversy and have been criticized by experts such as Yann LeCun, who claimed Musk's panic was influenced by reading Nick Bostrom's book ''Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies|Superintelligence'', and by Musk's attraction to the idea that he will save humanity. Consequently, according to CNBC, Musk is "not always looked upon favorably" by the AI research community. Mark Zuckerberg has clashed with Musk on the issue and called his AI warnings "pretty irresponsible".

In 2016, when asked whether he thinks Simulated reality#Simulation argument|humans live in a computer simulation, perhaps controlled by a vast AI, Musk stated that "the odds that we're in 'base reality' is one in billions." Harvard physicist Lisa Randall disputes this and has argued the probability of our living in a simulation is "effectively zero".

The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF), a Washington, D.C. think-tank, awarded its Annual Luddite Award to "alarmists touting an artificial intelligence apocalypse"; its president, Robert D. Atkinson, complained that Musk and others say AI is the largest existential threat to humanity. Atkinson stated "That's not a very winning message if you want to get AI funding out of Congress to the National Science Foundation." ''Nature (journal)|Nature'', referring to the award, said that "concerns over AI are not simply fear-mongering" and concluded: "It is crucial that progress in technology is matched by solid, well-funded research to anticipate the scenarios it could bring about ... If that is a Luddite perspective, then so be it."

