In August 2020, Musk promoted the unproven theory claiming that Ancient astronauts|aliens built the Egyptian pyramids. Egypt's Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation|Minister of International Co-operation Rania Al-Mashat replied to these claims by inviting him to the country to see for himself and implored him to look at further evidence about the construction. Zahi Hawass, Egyptian archaeologist, also dismissed his claims, calling it a "complete hallucination". Musk later tweeted a BBC article, writing "This BBC article provides a sensible summary for how it was done."

In November 2022, Musk shared a tweet with an article from a right-wing fake news website which promoted a conspiracy theory that the attack on Paul Pelosi was the result of a drunken Pelosi fighting with a Male prostitution|male prostitute.

In the wake of a 2023 Allen, Texas outlet mall shooting|mass shooting at an outlet mall in Allen, Texas on May 6, 2023, Musk baselessly tried to cast doubt on evidence collected by journalists regarding the shooter's political beliefs. Law enforcement officers said in a press conference that the shooter, Mauricio Garcia, had "neo-Nazi Ideation (creative process)|ideation", and large Nazi tattoos on his body, including a swastika and the Esoteric insignia of the Schutzstaffel|SS lightning bolt logo. Musk doubled down on his denial of the evidence that the shooter was a white supremacist in a CNBC interview on May 16.

In July 2023, Musk commented on Bronny James' cardiac arrest, tweeting "we cannot ascribe everything to the vaccine, but, by the same token, we cannot ascribe nothing."

In November 2023, Musk endorsed a tweet referencing an White genocide conspiracy theory|antisemitic conspiracy theory that "hordes of minorities" are infiltrating Western countries and that Jews are "pushing hatred" against white people. The White House condemned Musk's endorsement of the tweet as "unacceptable".

In late November 2023, Musk tweeted a meme promoting the widely discredited far-right Pizzagate conspiracy theory, which alleged that the Clintons and Democratic Party leaders ran a secret satanic child sex ring in a D.C. pizzeria known as Comet Ping Pong. After a few hours, Musk deleted the tweet.

