Before the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States, Musk criticized Trump by saying: "I feel a bit stronger that he is probably not the right guy. He doesn't seem to have the sort of character that reflects well on the United States." Following Trump's inauguration, Musk expressed approval of Trump's choice of Rex Tillerson as United States Secretary of State|Secretary of State and accepted an invitation to participate in two councils advising the president. Regarding his cooperation with Trump, Musk subsequently commented: "The more voices of reason that the President hears, the better." He resigned from both business advisory councils in June 2017 after only a few months, in protest of Trump's decision to United States withdrawal from the Paris Agreement|withdraw the United States from the Paris Agreement on climate change, stating: "Climate change is real. Leaving Paris is not good for America or the world". In January 2017, Musk criticized Trump travel ban|Trump's travel ban, saying "The blanket entry ban on citizens from certain primarily Muslim countries is not the best way to address the country's challenges". In May 2020, amidst Musk's restarting of Tesla assembly plant production during the COVID-19 pandemic, Trump tweeted in support of Musk, which Musk welcomed and publicly thanked him for on Twitter.

Musk said he voted for Hillary Clinton in the 2016 United States presidential election|2016 U.S. presidential election and voted for Joe Biden in the 2020 United States presidential election|2020 U.S. presidential election. In July 2022, Donald Trump alleged that Musk had told him he voted for him in 2016, referred to Musk as a "bullshit artist", and called Musk's contract with Twitter "rotten". Musk denied telling Trump that he had voted for him, said it is "time for Trump to hang up his hat & sail into the sunset" and said that Trump would be "too old to be chief executive of anything, let alone the United States of America." Afterwards, Trump said on Truth Social that "When Elon Musk came to the White House asking me for help on all of his many subsidized projects, whether it's electric cars that don't drive long enough, driverless cars that crash, or rocketships to nowhere, without which subsidies he'd be worthless, and telling me how he was a big Trump fan and Republican, I could have said, 'drop to your knees and beg,' and he would have done it". Trump also said on Truth Social that "Now Elon should focus on getting himself out of the Twitter mess because he could owe $44 billion for something that's perhaps worthless. Also, lots of competition for electric cars!". Afterwards, Musk tweeted "LMAO|Lmaooo" in response to another Twitter user who posted a screenshot of Trump's comments and responded with a GIF of Grampa Simpson yelling at clouds.

In August 2019, Musk tweeted in support of the 2020 Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang, whose platform revolved around job displacement caused by automation and artificial intelligence. Musk tweeted that universal basic income, which Yang supports, is "obviously needed". Musk went on to voice support for Kanye West's independent Kanye West 2020 presidential campaign|run for president in July 2020.

In September 2021, following the launch of Inspiration4, Musk mocked President Joe Biden when asked why Biden had not yet congratulated the SpaceX mission and its civilian crew.

In May 2022, Musk said that he could "no longer support" the Democrats, saying that "they have become the party of division & hate" and would be voting Republican due to Biden's support for Trade union|unions and his inability to "get a lot done". In June 2022, Musk voted for Mayra Flores in a 2022 Texas's 34th congressional district special election|special election, stating it was the first time he ever voted Republican. In November 2022, Musk tweeted that he would support Ron DeSantis in the 2024 United States presidential election if he chose to run.

