CSS image crop
|Image = Elon Musk gives tour for President Barack Obama.jpg
|bSize = 600
|cWidth = 290
|cHeight = 250
|oTop = 57
|oLeft = 90
|Location = right
|Description = Musk (right) and President Barack Obama at the Cape Canaveral Space Launch Complex 40, launch site of the SpaceX Falcon 9, 2010
}}
File:Vice President Pence at the Kennedy Space Center (49945667303).jpg|thumb|upright=1.3|Musk with Vice President [[Mike Pence and Second Lady Karen Pence in 2020]]

In 2014, Musk described himself politically as "half Democrat, half Republican" and "I'm somewhere in the middle, socially liberal and fiscally conservative." In 2018, he stated that he was "not a conservative. I'm registered Independent voter|independent [and] politically moderate." He stated in 2022 that he had "voted overwhelmingly for Democrats, historically" but intended to vote Republican in an upcoming election.

Prompted by the emergence of artificial intelligence, Musk has voiced support for a universal basic income; he additionally backs direct democracy and has stated he thinks the government on Mars will be a direct democracy. He has described himself as a "Socialism|socialist" but "not the kind that shifts resources from most productive to least productive"; he later clarified not to take this tweet too seriously. He supports targeting an inclusive tax rate of 40%; prefers consumption taxes to income taxes; and supports the Inheritance tax|estate tax, as the "probability of progeny being equally excellent at capital allocation is not high."

In an interview with ''The Washington Post'', Musk stated he was a "significant (though not top-tier) donor to Democrats", but that he also gives heavily to Republicans. Musk further stated that political contributions are a requirement in order to have a voice in the United States government. A 2012 report from the Sunlight Foundation, a nonpartisan group that tracks government spending, found that since 2002, SpaceX had spent more than $4 million on lobbying the United States Congress and more than $800,000 in political contributions to Democrats and Republicans. As for Musk specifically, the same report said that "SpaceX's campaign to win political support has been systematic and sophisticated," and that "unlike most tech-startups, SpaceX has maintained a significant lobbying presence in Washington almost since day1." and that "Musk himself has donated roughly $725,000 to various campaigns since 2002. In 2004, he contributed $2,000 to President George W. Bush's reelection campaign, maxing out (over $100,000) to Barack Obama's reelection campaign and donated $5,000 to Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, who represents Florida, a state critical to the space industry. [...] All told, Musk and SpaceX gave out roughly $250,000 in the 2012 election cycle."

Musk has described the United States as "[inarguably] the American exceptionalism|greatest country that has ever existed on Earth," describing it as "the greatest force for good of any country that's ever been." Musk believes democracy would not exist any longer if not for the United States, saying that it prevented this disappearance on three occasions through its participation in World War I, World War II, and the Cold War. Musk also stated that he thinks "it would be a mistake to say the United States is perfect, it certainly is not. There have been many foolish things the United States has done and bad things the United States has done."

In September 2021, in response to Texas List of governors of Texas|Governor Greg Abbott saying that Musk supported Texas' "social policies", Musk tweeted "In general, I believe government should rarely impose its will upon the people, and, when doing so, should aspire to maximize their cumulative happiness" and "That said, I would prefer to stay out of politics".

In November 2021, Musk was criticized after mocking US Senator Bernie Sanders on Twitter: Sanders had posted a message on Twitter saying "We must demand that the extremely wealthy pay their fair share. Period." and Musk had replied: "I keep forgetting that you're still alive."

In October 2023, an X user complained that the Charlottesville’s  Robert E. Lee statue, which was the focus of the white supremacist Unite the right rally, was melted down by foundry workers. The user, who claimed to be a relative of the general, lamented, saying that "my kind is hated" and "many seek our extinction." Elon agreed with the user: "They absolutely want your extinction."

