Musk has received criticism over his views on and actions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In early 2020, Musk referred to COVID-19 as a "specific form of the common cold", stated that "the coronavirus panic is dumb", and that the "danger of panic still far exceeds danger of corona IMO (in my opinion)|imo. If we over-allocate medical resources to corona, it will come at expense of treating other illnesses". Musk has additionally been criticized for tweeting contentious claims on the disease, including that "Kids are essentially immune, but elderly with existing conditions are vulnerable", which he accompanied with a graphic showing that no children had died in Italy by March 15 and for saying "Based on current trends, probably close to zero new cases in US too by end of April." In addition, he promoted articles which suggested that healthcare companies were inflating COVID-19 case numbers for financial reasons, promoted a paper on the benefits of chloroquine that was subsequently widely discredited and pulled down by Google, and retweeted a video which called for an immediate end to social distancing measures, adding "[d]ocs make good points".

When the Alameda County Sheriff's Office|Alameda County Sheriff ordered all non-essential businesses to shut down, Musk and Tesla initially refused to comply, arguing that vehicle manufacturing and energy infrastructure are critical sectors, citing the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Musk called the lockdown "Fascism|fascist" on a Tesla earnings call, stating:
<blockquote>So, the extension of the shelter-in-place, and frankly I would call it forcibly imprisoning people in their homes against all their constitutional rights — my opinion — and erasing people's freedoms in ways that are horrible and wrong, and not why people came to America or built this country.</blockquote>

Musk later sent out numerous tweets opposing mandatory lockdowns such as "FREE AMERICA NOW." On May 11, Musk reopened Tesla's Fremont production line in defiance and violation of Alameda County's orders and tweeted that "Tesla is restarting production today against Alameda County rules. I will be on the line with everyone else. If anyone is arrested, I ask that it only be me." Musk also announced that Tesla would be moving its headquarters to Texas or Nevada and that Tesla had filed a lawsuit against Alameda County challenging its "shutdown" of the Fremont factory; the suit was subsequently withdrawn. The Alameda County Public Health Department explained it was waiting on a plan that Tesla had promised to provide by May 11 that would walk through how it would protect workers' health during the COVID-19 pandemic.

In March 2020, in response to a request to repurpose the Tesla factory to make Shortages related to the COVID-19 pandemic#Mechanical ventilation|urgently needed ventilators, Musk promised that Tesla would make ventilators "if there is a shortage". When Nate Silver responded that there was a current shortage, Musk replied, "Ventilators are not difficult, but cannot be produced instantly. Which hospitals have these shortages you speak of right now?" He received widespread requests from dignitaries around the world, including the Ukrainian Ulana Suprun|Health minister, Bolivia's Mohammed Mostajo-Radji|Ambassador for Science and Technology to Silicon Valley, and Nigeria's Zainab Ahmed|Ministry of Finance. When asked about what they received from Musk, California hospital representatives noted that they received CPAP machines made by ResMed instead and not "full ventilators," though they expressed gratitude nonetheless.

On November 16, 2020, the phrase "Space Karen (pejorative)|Karen" began to Twitter trends|trend on Twitter after a scientist referred to Musk as such, over comments Musk made questioning the effectiveness of COVID-19 testing and suggested Musk "didn't read up on the test" before complaining. Musk was also accused by virologist Angela Rasmussen of spreading Misinformation related to the COVID-19 pandemic|misinformation about the virus. On November 14, he wrote on Twitter that he had "most likely" contracted COVID-19, referring to the virus as "a type of cold". In December 2020, ''Politico'' named Musk's prediction that there would be "close to zero new cases" of COVID-19 by April one of "the most audacious, confident and spectacularly incorrect prognostications about the year".

In December 2022, Musk tweeted "Preferred gender pronoun|My pronouns are Prosecute/Anthony Fauci|Fauci", which drew responses from US lawmakers. In February 2023, he praised anti-vaxx comments made by Woody Harrelson during ''Saturday Night Live''.

