In February 2023, following racist comments from cartoonist Scott Adams in which he described Black people as a hate group and encouraged racial segregation, Musk accused the media of being racist against Whites and Asians and agreed with a tweet saying that "Adams' comments weren't good" but that there was "an element of truth to it".

In May 2023, Musk attacked George Soros on Twitter after the investor sold a small stake in Tesla. Musk compared Soros to the Jewish supervillain Magneto (Marvel Comics)|Magneto. When his comment was criticized by another Twitter user who said that Soros had good intentions, Musk responded "You assume they are good intentions. They are not. He wants to erode the very fabric of civilization. Soros hates humanity." The Anti-Defamation League criticized the tweets as antisemitic, noting that Soros had long been the George Soros conspiracy theories|target of conspiracy theories, and claimed that the tweets would embolden extremists. A member of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel)|Israeli Foreign Ministry criticized Musk and Twitter for not combating antisemitism on the platform. The minister of Israel's Ministry of Diaspora Affairs defended Musk stating that "Criticism of Soros [...] is anything but anti-Semitism." In an interview following the criticism Musk denied being antisemitic but also asserted that "I'll say what I want, and if the consequence of that is losing money, so be it." When pressed on the antisemitic elements of his comments Musk replied "I'm a pro-Semite, if anything."

In August 2023, Musk criticized the "Kill the Boer" song which was sung by Julius Malema during a rally for the far-left South African party Economic Freedom Fighters. He claimed that the song was a pushing for a White genocide. Malema subsequently replied on Twitter stating "''O bolela masepa'' ("''You are talking shit"'').
In September 2023, Musk assured Benjamin Netanyahu that he was against antisemitism.  On 28 September 2023, Musk discussed the issues online with a panel of right-leaning Jewish leaders including former Israeli president Reuven Rivlin, attorney Alan Dershowitz, who represented Donald Trump in his first impeachment trial as well as several Rabbi|Rabbis including Shmuley Boteach, where Musk denied allegations of antisemitism and cited the suspension of Kanye West as an example of enforcement on his platform. The group also criticized the ADL's criticism of Musk. 

On November 15, 2023, Musk expressed support for white nationalist ideology and posted a response agreeing with an antisemitic tweet accusing Jews of promoting "hatred against whites," writing "You have said the actual truth." Following this, Musk advocated for white pride, saying it was "super messed-up" that, as a far-right Twitter user argued, white people are not "allowed to be proud of their race." He was condemned by the White House for his post, described as a "hideous lie". Musk later acknowledged the tweet as a mistake, saying "I handed a loaded gun to those who hate me and to those who are antisemitic and for that I am quite sorry."  Musk described his tweet as "one of the most foolish, if not the most foolish, thing I’ve done".

Musk wrote that he doesn’t believe that "all Jewish communities" hate white people but said the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) "unjustly attacks the majority of the West, despite the majority of the West supporting the Jewish people and Israel. This is because they cannot, by their own tenets, criticize the minority groups who are their primary threat. I am deeply offended by ADL’s messaging and any other groups who push de facto anti-white racism or anti-Asian racism or racism of any kind." He also tweeted that his criticism of Jews applies to more groups than just the ADL, “You right that this does not extend to all Jewish communities, but it is also not just limited to ADL”. At the DealBook Summit on November 29, 2023, journalist Andrew Ross Sorkin questioned Musk about the withdrawal of advertisers from X following his recent posts. Musk said in response, "I hope they stop. Don’t advertise" and "If somebody is going to try to blackmail me with advertising, blackmail me with money, go fuck yourself. Go fuck yourself. Is that clear? I hope it is."

