In October 2022, Musk suggested that Taiwan should become "a Special administrative regions of China|special administrative zone" of China with an "arrangement that's more lenient than Hong Kong" during an interview with the ''Financial Times''. The proposal drew cross-party criticism from Taiwanese lawmakers.  of the Democratic Progressive Party posted on Facebook that "Musk's solution is all about victim concessions." Chen Shih-chung commented that "Elon Musk has brought about revolutionary change through Tesla and SpaceX, even aiding Ukraine against the Russian dictatorship through Starlink," and "I'm calling on Elon to hold himself to the same democratic values regarding Taiwan." Chinese Ambassador to the United States Qin Gang thanked Musk for his suggestion adding "Provided that China's sovereignty, security and development interests are guaranteed, after reunification Taiwan will enjoy a high degree of autonomy as a special administrative region, and a vast space for development." Representative of Taiwan to the United States Hsiao Bi-khim said that "our freedom and democracy are not for sale." Shortly after Musk's comments, China gave Tesla a tax break.

In May 2023 during an interview with CNBC Musk remarked that "The official policy of China is that Taiwan should be integrated... One does not need to read between the lines. One can simply read the lines. There's a certain inevitability to the situation." Taiwan's Foreign Minister Joseph Wu tweeted at Musk in response, saying in part that China's "expansionist policy violates rules-based international order & the status quo. Mr. @ElonMusk, other than money, there is something we call VALUES." The China Daily ran the headline "Elon Musk: Taiwan should be integrated" following the interview. In September 2023, at the All-In Summit in Los Angeles, Musk again stated that Taiwan was part of China likening it to Hawaii. He again received significant criticism from Taiwan with Foreign Minister Wu tweeting that Taiwan was not for sale and adding “Hope Elon Musk can also ask the CCP to open X to its people. Perhaps he thinks banning it is a good policy, like turning off Starlink to thwart Ukraine’s counterstrike against Russia." US congressmen Andy Ogles and Randy Weber published an open letter challenging Musk's interpretation of history and his exposure to the CCP.

