In 2000, the label moved its operations to London along with its physical music and merchandise store Warpmart.

Co-founder Rob Mitchell was diagnosed with cancer in early 2001. He died later that year, aged 38.

In January 2004, Warp launched an online digital music and entertainment store, Bleep.com, notable for being the first store in the world to completely avoid all digital rights management features in the downloadable tracks, unlike other music stores such as iTunes Music Store|iTunes and Rhapsody (online music service)|Rhapsody. Warpmart has now been absorbed into Bleep.com. Today Bleep sells a carefully curated selection of music from a diverse range of labels. The site has also released its own limited edition LPs The Green Series, and an annual digital release comprising the Top 100 tracks of each year.

On 27 September 2004, Warp released its second music video compilation, named ''WarpVision'', featuring most of the videos produced from 1989 to 2004.

2005 saw the release of ''Warp'', the first book in the Labels Unlimited series. Written by Rob Young, the book gave an illustrated history of the label, as well as offering a complete discography. The Warp website said the book was "A very beautiful thing and like our very own This Is Your Life", referring to the ''This Is Your Life (UK TV series)|This Is Your Life'' UK TV series.

The label continued to expand its roster, signing acts including !!!, Battles (band)|Battles, Born Ruffians, Maxïmo Park, Gravenhurst (band)|Gravenhurst and Grizzly Bear (band)|Grizzly Bear.

For the label's 20th anniversary in 2009, several Warp20 concerts took place in Paris, New York City, Sheffield, Tokyo, Berlin and London. Warp also celebrated by releasing the Warp20 box set, In October of that year, to coincide with the ''Universal Everything & You - Drawing in Motion'' exhibition running at the National Media Museum's Media Space at Science Museum, London, a 20-minute piece created by Simon Pyke (Freeform), built upon the foundations of the exhibition soundtrack, was released. In December 2013 Warp collaborated with Tate Britain to present a free evening of performance and installations, ''Warp x Tate'', alongside artist Jeremy Deller, inspired by Deller's work 'The History of the World', with contributions from Oneohtrix Point Never, Patten, Darkstar, Hudson Mohawke and Rustie.

In 2019, Warp celebrated their 30th anniversary (stylized as WXAXRXP, a combination of WARP, and XXX, the roman numeral for 30) with three days straight of broadcasts on NTS Radio featuring old radio performances by various artists, as well as a few new ones. In addition Warp released a 10 EP set (vinyl-only) of 20 minute radio sessions, featuring (among other things) Aphex Twin's 1995 ''John Peel|Peel Session 2'' and a version of Boards of Canada's 1999 ''Peel Session (Boards of Canada EP)|Peel Session'' that included the final track ("XYZ", which was cut from almost all previous releases of the EP).

