File:StephenMerchantAltNov09.jpg|upright|thumb|[[Stephen Merchant received significant praise for his portrayal of Wheatley.]]
Stephen Merchant won two awards for his voice role as Wheatley: "D.I.C.E. Award for Outstanding Achievement in Character|Outstanding Achievement in Character Performance" at the 15th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, and "Best Performance by a Human Male" at the VGX (award show)#2011 Awards|2011 Spike Video Game Awards. Wheatley earned a Spike TV nomination for 'Character of the Year'.

''Edge (magazine)|Edge'' staff wrote that Merchant's portrayal of Wheatley was "neurotically stuttering and blubbering" and that his "idiosyncratic staccato Bristolian burr" was a "fascinating choice". ''Edge'' staff also wrote that he served as the game's "comic relief" and called him "alternately hapless and sinister, the mesmerizing animations of his 'eye light' and a changing role throughout make him an unforgettable presence". ''The Daily Telegraph|The Telegraph''s Tom Hoggins wrote that the "delightfully skittish" Wheatley's "casual, nervous patter reacting naturally to the events unfolding around you" was performed well by Merchant. He later wrote that the dialogue of ''Portal 2'' was funny due in part to "the way that the frantic, nervous babble of Wheatley contrasts so effectively with the cynical, sinister goading from GLaDOS" and that neither are overbearing. ''The Guardian''s Nick Cowen wrote that Wheatley was a "stammering, motor-mouthed droid" and at times "funny and monstrous and spine chilling". ''The Guardian''s Will Freeman wrote that the "apparently sentient computers" in ''Portal 2'' are "outstanding" though players may have a "divided opinion" on Wheatley.

An editor for ''The Province'' wrote that Merchant's portrayal of Wheatley "really adds to the personality and character of the game". ''Official Xbox Magazine''s Jon Hicks praised the narrative of ''Portal 2'' and cited Wheatley's "chirpy idiocy" as a contributing factor to its quality. ''OXM''s Ryan McCaffrey wrote that Wheatley was "played to perfection" by Merchant. ''Computer and Video Games'' Andy Robinson wrote that Wheatley's personality was "equally loud" to GLaDOS and "brilliant". ''GameZone'' Ben PerLee wrote that Wheatley was "cute but stupid" and called him "adorable and bumbling, a lovable little guy who is much more involved than you might expect". ''The Escapist (magazine)|The Escapist''s Russ Pitts wrote that Wheatley was "a helpful – if dumb – robot companion with a chipper English accent". ''The Globe and Mail''s Chad Sapieha wrote that Merchant was "enormously entertaining as a slow-witted sphere". ''Ars Technica'' Ben Kuchera wrote that "the casting [of Merchant] was a brilliant choice". He also wrote that "there is something about his delivery that works wonderfully, and it seems like he was having a good time recording his lines". Kevin Wong of ''Complex Networks|Complex'' included Wheatley to his "best supporting character in video games", and stated that "It's hard to get angry at, or form any kind of emotional connection to, something that has no face. Wheatley, however, makes up for his lack of humanity with dry, British repartee." ''Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition'' listed Wheatley as 37th in their list of "top 50 video game villains". ''TheGamer'' also included Wheatley on their "Iconic Video Game Characters", stating that "Wheatley is a fantastic villain, and his unique humor made him a fan-favorite character among the Portal fan base."

''PC Gamer''s Dan Stapleton praised Wheatley as "fantastically voiced" by Merchant and wrote that he was "basically playing the same mind-bogglingly stupid character from the Ricky Gervais comedy ''Extras (TV series)|Extras''". ''PC Gamer''s Craig Pearson wrote that "his nervous English voice&nbsp;... is another indicator that while Valve might not have known what they had with the original ''Portal (video game)|Portal'', this time around they’re a lot more confident". Giant Bomb's Ryan Davis wrote that Merchant voiced Wheatley with "terrific nervous energy". ''Wired (magazine)|Wired''s Chris Kohler wrote that "you'll fall in love with Wheatley, a friendly robot with a heart of gold and the charming voice of actor Stephen Merchant". ''IGN'' Charles Onyett wrote that it's "difficult to overstate how Merchant's obvious enthusiasm for the role benefits the game" and that "no word Wheatley speaks is without witty inflection, and the consistently clever writing perfectly complements the onscreen action". He also wrote that Merchant's Wheatley "steals the show" while GLaDOS and Cave Johnson (Portal)|Cave Johnson's voice actors Ellen McLain and J. K. Simmons turn in solid performances. ''PALGN'' Adam Ghiggino wrote that Merchant's performance was "brilliant" and that he has "a lot of emotion to [his] movement". ''Video Gamer'' Jamin Smith expressed that Merchant's voice was 'familiar' and wrote that Wheatley "possesses more personality than the cast of most other games put together" despite "a lack of any distinguishing features at all" in its appearance.

''GamesRadar'' Tyler Wilde wrote that Wheatley was "surprisingly expressive" and called it "bumbling". CNN's Larry Frum called Wheatley "silly, frantic and almost childlike". ABC News' Lou Kesten called it "equally memorable" to GLaDOS and a "chatty, nervous A.I." ''Entertainment Weekly''s John Young described its eyeball's appearance as a "giant blue eyeball resembles a HAL 9000 computer with an Apple Inc.|Apple makeover". He also wrote that he was the "most delightful artificial-intelligence program one could hope to meet, and his witty quips and general clumsiness are a frequent source of amusement" and that he is "splendidly voiced" by Merchant. Editors for ''CNET'' wrote that "if Stephen Merchant doesn't win every video game voice actor award for his portrayal of the protagonist's wacky robot sidekick, there is no justice in either this world or any virtual one". An editor for ''CBS News'' wrote that Wheatley was "chirpy and well-intentioned" but also "dim-witted". The editor added that the "interactions between the player, GLaDOS and Wheatley are what give "Portal 2" its charm and provide much of the humor that keeps the game captivating puzzle after puzzle".

However, not all of Wheatley's reception has been positive; in an article by ''Ars Technica'', Peter Bright stated that the character's role in the game's plot was "predictable" and that "his tireless, relentlessly stupid schtick" got old quickly, with the character's jokes being "repetitive", further stating that Wheatley's "inane babble served only to disrupt the mood".

