The first World Governments Summit was held in Dubai in 2013, and has been held annually since then. In 2013, themes included building citizen trust in governmental entities, social media as a tool for civic engagement, private-public sector partnerships, and measuring development.

File:A_Chat_between_Mohammad_Al_Gergawi_and_Klaus_Schwab_during_World_Government_Summit.jpg|thumb|A conversation between Mohammad Al Gergawi and Klaus Schwab during World Governments Summit
In 2014, themes included partnerships and innovation in government service delivery, government smart toolboxes (using information technology for citizen engagement, anti-corruption efforts and helping citizens affected by conflict) and digital government.

In 2015, themes included smart cities, innovation, and better jobs.

In 2016, themes included the Sustainable Development Goals, the state of sustainability, and advanced science and the future of government (robotics and artificial intelligence, genomic medicine and biometrics). In 2016, the summit included an inaugural Best Minister in the World award  which was awarded to Greg Hunt, at that time Australian Minister of Federal Environment, later appointed as Australian Minister of Health.

In 2017, the summit focused on four main themes: 1) climate change & food security, 2) citizen well-being & happiness, 3) government agility and geopolitics & humanitarian aid, with the goal of focusing on fundamental questions that aim to pave the way for that future across the globe. The summit was held under the patronage of Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, the Vice President and Prime Minister of the UAE and Emirate of Dubai|ruler of Dubai, and included participation of seven international organizations as strategic partners, including the International Monetary Fund, the United Nations, UNESCO, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development|Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the World Economic Forum.

In 2018, the themes included artificial intelligence and happiness.

In 2023, the summit was held under the theme of “Shaping Future Governments”. It brought together 20 heads of state and government, 250 ministers, along with the participation of 10,000 private sector leaders, global experts, and thought leaders to tackle future opportunities, trends, and challenges. 

